Fannie Mae RefiNow 
 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – RATE/TERM REFINANCE   
Maximum  Minimum  Underwriting Engine & 
Property Type 1  Maximum CLTV/HCLTV 
LTV  Credit Score  Required Response 
1-unit 
Refer to Subordinate 
Condo  97%  DU – Approve/Eligible 
Financing section below 
PUD 
NA 
Manufactured Home  Refer to Subordinate 
95%  DU – Approve/Eligible 
(double-wide)   Financing section below 
1.  Texas properties – any loan that must be classified as Section 50(a)(6) is not eligible for RefiNow. 
 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
Fixed rate, fully amortizing, conventional conforming first lien mortgage loan program used to refinance one-
unit primary residences for borrowers whose income is at or below 100% of the area median income (AMI). 
Additional requirements of the existing loan being refinanced include: 
•  Must be a conventional mortgage loan owned or securitized by Fannie Mae. 
•  Must be seasoned at least 12 months (from the original note date to new loan note date). 
•  Must not be subject to recourse, repurchase agreement, indemnification, outstanding repurchase 
demand, or credit enhancement (unless the new loan is also subject to the credit enhancement or it is 
no longer required). 
•  Must not be an existing high LTV refinance loan, DU Refi Plus® loan, or Refi Plus® loan. 
A look up tool is available at knowyouroptions.com to determine whether the borrower’s existing loan is owned 
by Fannie Mae. Refer to Fannie Mae Lender Letter LL-2021-10 and the Desktop Underwriter/Desktop 
Originator Release Notes DU Version 11.0 June Update for further program details. 
BORROWER BENEFIT 
The refinanced loan must provide both of the following benefits to the borrower: 
•  A reduction in interest rate of at least 50 basis points, and 
•  A reduction in the monthly payment that includes principal, interest, and the mortgage insurance 
payment (if applicable). 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
Loantrac Product Name  Term 
Fannie Mae RefiNow 30-Year Fixed  30 years 
Fannie Mae RefiNow 25-Year Fixed   25 years 
Fannie Mae RefiNow 20-Year Fixed   20 years 
Fannie Mae RefiNow 15-Year Fixed  15 years 
Fannie Mae RefiNow 10-Year Fixed  10 years 
 
LOAN REGISTRATION 
When registering a loan with > 95% LTV, the user will be directed to the Additional Loan Purpose Info section of 
the online 1003 in Loantrac, where the current First Mortgage Holder must be selected in the drop-down box. 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 7  Document #5367 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae RefiNow 
LOAN AMOUNTS 
MAXIMUM  
Maximum standard conforming loan limits for 1-unit property (high-cost area limits except for standard AK, 
HI, and USVI limits, are not eligible under this program). 
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  Borrowers whose income is at or below 100% of the area median income (AMI) 
The loan must have identical borrowers on the new loan as the existing loan. New borrowers cannot be added. 
One or more borrowers may only be removed if: 
•  The remaining borrower(s) meet the payment history requirements and provides evidence that they 
have made at least the last 12 months of payments from their own funds, or 
•  Due to death of a borrower (evidence of deceased borrower’s death must be documented in loan file). 
 
In all cases, at least one borrower from the mortgage being refinanced must be retained. 
 
Non-occupant borrowers are permitted if they were also a borrower on the existing loan, and: 
•  A maximum LTV, CLTV, and HCLTV ratio of 95% applies (CLTV ratio may be up to 105% when a 
Community Seconds® is being resubordinated). 
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  1-unit properties 
•  Condominiums 
•  Planned unit developments (PUDs) 
•  Modular homes 
•  Manufactured homes, double-wide only 
 
NOTE FOR CONDOS AND PUDS 
All project review requirements will be waived for properties located in a condo or PUD project except that 
the lender must confirm the project is not a condo hotel or motel, houseboat, timeshare or segmented 
ownership project. 
The lender must confirm appropriate property and flood insurance is obtained. Condos: Master hazard 
insurance and HO-6 (if required) will be reviewed by Project Review team. 
Search for and select “Fannie Mae RefiNow” from the project list in Loantrac, and enter the actual name of 
the project in the Condo Name field. Condo Status will default to Established, and it can be left as-is. Leave 
the remaining fields blank. 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  Condominiums part of a condo hotel or motel, houseboat, timeshare or segmented ownership project 
•  Cooperative properties (Flagstar overlay) 
MINIMUM CREDIT SCORES 
Follow DU response to determine loan eligibility. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 7  Document #5367 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae RefiNow 
FEES / CLOSING COSTS 
There are no limitations on fees or closing costs outside of Flagstar and regulatory standards.  
 
A $500 credit must be applied to all loans that obtain an appraisal. This credit is not required to be disclosed on 
the Loan Estimate, but it must be entered as a negative number in the Payoffs and Payments section of the 
Closing Disclosure and labeled as “RefiNow Appraisal Credit.” Loans that are approved by the underwriter with 
a Property Inspection Waiver (PIW) on the findings of the last DU submission will not receive the credit 
because there will be no appraisal fee charged. 
 
QUALIFYING RATE 
Note rate 
 
QUALIFYING RATIOS 
Debt-to-income (DTI) ratios are limited to a maximum of 65%. Refer to mortgage insurance companies for 
additional restrictions. 
RESERVES 
Determined by DU 
 
SUBORDINATE FINANCING 
•  New subordinate financing is only permitted if it replaces existing subordinate financing. 
•  Existing subordinate financing: 
  May not be paid off with the proceeds of the new loan, and 
o
  Can remain in place if it is resubordinated to the new loan: 
o
  Standard subordinate financing up to 97% CLTV (95% CLTV for manufactured homes) 
  Community Seconds subordinate financing up to 105% CTLV (95% for manuf. homes). 
  May be simultaneously refinanced with the existing first lien mortgage, provided that: 
o
  The unpaid principal balance (UPB) of the new subordinate lien is not more than the 
UPB of the subordinate lien being refinanced at the time of payoff, and 
  There is no increase in the monthly principal and interest payment on the subordinate lien. 
Refer to the Subordinate Financing section of the Conventional Underwriting Guidelines for details. 
 
TEMPORARY BUYDOWNS 
Not eligible 
UNDERWRITING 
•  Refer to Fannie Mae Lender Letter LL-2021-10, Introduction of the RefiNow Option. 
•  All loans must be submitted to Desktop Underwriter (DU) and receive an Approve/Eligible response.  
•  Manual underwriting is not allowed (Flagstar overlay). 
•  DU will automate the identification of loan casefiles that appear to be eligible for RefiNow based on the 
borrowers listed on the loan application, the property address, qualifying income, and several other 
factors. Refer to the Desktop Underwriter/Desktop Originator Release Notes DU Version 11.0 June 
Update for additional information. 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 7  Document #5367 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae RefiNow 
BORROWER INCOME LIMIT 
•  Borrowers whose income is at or below 100% of the area median income (AMI) 
•  In determining whether a loan is eligible under the borrower income limits, the lender must consider the 
income from all borrowers who will sign the note, to the extent that the income is considered in 
evaluating creditworthiness for the new loan. 
•  The lender must use the same methodology in determining income eligibility for a RefiNow loan as they 
use in reporting “Monthly Income” in Loan Delivery. 
 
DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS 
The temporary credit and underwriting requirements and guidance related to COVID-19 also apply to 
RefiNow mortgages (e.g., P&L and bank statement for self-employed borrowers). Refer to Temporary 
COVID Guidelines for complete details. 
Income Type  Minimum Documentation Requirements 
The borrower’s most recent year-to-date paystub dated 
no earlier than 30 days prior to the loan application; see 
Base Pay (non-variable) 
Employment Documentation requirements in the 
Conventional Underwriting Guidelines 
Base Pay (variable) including but not limited to:  The borrower’s most recent year-to-date paystub and 
Fluctuating Hours, Tip, Bonus, Overtime Income,  W2 covering the most recent one-year period 
Commission Income 
Military Income  Military Leave and Earnings Statement 
One year personal and business returns, unless the 
terms to waive business tax returns are met: 
•  closing costs are all personal funds (e.g. 
Self-Employment 
business funds are not eligible), and 
•  borrower has been self-employed in the same 
business for at least 5 years 
Copy of divorce decree, separation agreement, court 
Alimony, Child Support or Separate Maintenance  order or equivalent documentation, and one-month 
documentation of receipt 
Non-Employment Related Assets as Qualifying Income  Not eligible for use as qualifying income with RefiNow 
All Other Eligible Income Types  Standard guideline requirements 
 
The following additional documentation requirements apply: 
•  Verbal verification of employment (employed or self-employment) is required as noted in the 
Conventional Underwriting and Temporary COVID Guidelines. 
•  Verification of funds to close are required. Acceptable asset documentation includes one recent 
statement (monthly, quarterly, or annual) showing asset balance. 
•  Verification and consideration of recurring alimony and child support payments as a liability, if 
applicable, are required. Acceptable documentation includes a copy of the divorce decree, separation 
agreement, court order, or equivalent documentation confirming the amount of the obligation. 
PAYMENT HISTORY REQUIREMENTS 
Financed properties, including the subject property, must adhere to the mortgage history requirements per 
the Temporary COVID Guidelines, including validation all mortgages are current up to the Note date.  
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 7  Document #5367 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae RefiNow 
Missed payments resulting from a COVID-related forbearance must meet the eligibility requirements (e.g. 
reinstatement or approved servicer resolution) prior to consummation. 
The credit report can be relied on for determination of the payment history up to the date last reported on 
credit. Additional due diligence is required to review the payment history between the date last reported 
and the Note date in order to meet the eligibility requirements below. 
For the loan being refinanced, the loan must not have been: 
•  30 days delinquent in the most recent six-months. 
•  30 days delinquent more than once in the most recent 12 months. 
•  60 or more days delinquent in the most recent 12 months. 
 
See the Eligible Borrowers section for additional requirements when one or more borrowers on the existing 
loan are being removed. 
SPECIAL FEATURE CODE 
All RefiNow loans require Special Feature Code 868. 
SIGNIFICANT DEROGATORY CREDIT 
•  The borrower must comply with all applicable waiting periods following derogatory credit; refer to 
Significant Derogatory Credit Events in the Conventional Underwriting Guidelines (Exception: The LTV 
ratio limitation that applies to a previous foreclosure is not applicable – standard LTV ratios are 
permitted.) 
UNDERWRITER REFINOW WORKSHEET 
•  The underwriter must use the Fannie Mae RefiNow worksheet, Doc. #3296, to: 
  Validate the maximum interest rate, 
o
  Validate the maximum principal, interest and mortgage insurance (if applicable) payment, AND 
o
  Validate that the borrower does not receive in excess of $250 in cash back at closing. 
o
As stated on the worksheet, the following items MUST be submitted for all RefiNow applications to aid in 
verifying the calculations: 
•  Loan File must contain documentation to support current interest rate, principal and interest 
payment, and MI payment (e.g. Note, Mortgage Statement, etc.). 
•  Loan commitment expiration date cannot exceed the end of the month proceeding the next payment 
due date. 
USE OF PROCEEDS 
•  The new loan may only be used to pay off the existing first mortgage only. 
•  Subordinate liens, even if used for the purchase of the property and otherwise eligible for pay off with a 
rate/term refinance, may not be paid off with proceeds of a RefiNow loan. 
TEXAS REFINANCE LOANS 
All refinance loans in Texas will be evaluated against the criteria outlined in our Conventional Underwriting 
Guidelines, Texas Refinances section to determine if the loan must be originated under the requirements of 
Section 50(a)6 of the Texas Constitution. Loans that must be treated as Section 50(a)(6) are not eligible under 
this program. 
V. Product Guidelines  5 of 7  Document #5367 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae RefiNow 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE 
Mortgage insurance providers may have additional restrictions not listed within this document; check the 
provider’s website for completed details. Prior to running an MI quote through the Mortgage Insurance screen 
in Loantrac, users will be asked to complete a new field to identify the existing MI provider on the loan. 
 
MI Company  How They are Handling RefiNow Applications 
Arch 
Will insure only RefiNow loans if they currently insure the 
MGIC 
borrower’s existing loan 
Radian 
Enact (f.k.a. Genworth)  Will insure any loan that meets RefiNow guidelines, regardless 
National  of the current MI provider 
 
STANDARD MORTGAGE INSURANCE GUIDELINES 
All loans above 80% LTV require mortgage insurance coverage according to the following guidelines.  
Manufactured Home 
LTV  > 20-Year Term  <= 20-Year Term 
All Loan Terms 
95.01 - 97%  35%  35%  NA 
90.01 - 95%  30%  25%  30% 
85.01 - 90%  25%  12%  25% 
80.01 - 85%  12%  6%  12% 
 
Single financed and lender paid MI options are not eligible under this program (Flagstar overlay). 
 
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
States not listed are available without restrictions. 
State  Restriction 
Puerto Rico  Not eligible 
Loans that must be classified as Section 
Texas 
50(a)(6) loans are not eligible 
 
PREPAYMENT PENALTY 
None 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Closing docs may be ordered through Flagstar’s Web Based Closing Docs (WBCD) service available in 
Loantrac. 
 
A $500 credit must be applied to all loans that obtain an appraisal. The credit must be entered as a negative 
number in the Payoffs and Payments section of the Closing Disclosure and labeled as “RefiNow Appraisal 
Credit.” Loans that are approved by the underwriter with a Property Inspection Waiver (PIW) on the findings of 
the last DU submission will not receive the credit because there will be no appraisal fee charged. 
 
Borrowers may not receive cash out at closing in excess of $250. Excess proceeds may be applied as a 
curtailment on the new loan and must be clearly reflected on the Closing Disclosure. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  6 of 7  Document #5367 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae RefiNow 
ALL LOANS: 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series. 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Fixed Rate Note, 3200-series. 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements. 
IF APPLICABLE: 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Condo Rider, Form #3140. 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state PUD Rider, Form #3150. 
 
 
V. Product Guidelines  7 of 7  Document #5367 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE