Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
RESTRICTED USE PROGRAM  
Originators must complete Flagstar’s Construction Loan training course prior to originating any loans under this 
program. Originators will not be able to register construction transactions without having completed the course. 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – CONSTRUCTION/CONSTRUCTION-PERM 
Maximum  Maximum  Minimum  Maximum 
Property Type 
LTV  CLTV  Credit Score  Loan Amount 
85%  760  $1,500,000 
1-Unit  80%  Subordinate  680  $1,500,000 
PUD  80%  Financing Not  700  $2,000,000 
Site Condo  Allowed 
80%  720  $2,500,000 
75%  740  $3,000,000 
 
SECOND HOME – CONSTRUCTION/CONSTRUCTION-PERM 
Maximum  Maximum  Minimum  Maximum 
Property Type 
LTV   CLTV  Credit Score   Loan Amount 
1-Unit  80%  Subordinate  680  $1,500,000 
PUD  Financing Not 
Site Condo  75%  Allowed  700  $2,000,000 
 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
The Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate program provides both construction and permanent financing 
for borrowers looking to build a new primary or second home. During construction, only payments of interest 
due on the amount drawn to-date are required along with monthly escrows (unless the loan has an escrow 
waiver). The note will be modified upon completion of improvements to a fully amortized principal and interest 
payment. Soft costs (architectural, engineering and permit fees) may be financed.  Closing costs may only be 
financed if the loan purpose type is considered a rate/term refinance as defined in the Loan Registration 
section.  Full third-party builder contracts only. Teardowns and major renovations are eligible. All loans will be 
table-funded and must close in the name of Flagstar Bank, N.A. 
 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
Permanent  Construction/  Loan Term for 
Product Name 
Loan Term  Interest-Only Period  Registration 
Jumbo One-Close Construction 30-Year Fixed 12 month  30 years  12 months  372 
 
CONSTRUCTION TERM AND PROJECT SIZE 
For Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate loans, the maximum construction term allowed is 12 months. 
 
The construction term for the loan is determined by the following: 
•  The builder contract will be reviewed to determine the construction term. 
•  If completion terms are not indicated in the contract, an amendment may be provided confirming the 
construction period. 
•  If completion terms are not indicated in the contract and no amendment is added, then project size will 
determine the construction period. 
  The maximum project size eligible for a 12-month construction term is $1,500,000. Project size 
o
is defined as soft and hard costs to complete construction. Price of land is not included in 
construction cost and therefore not in project size. 
V. Product Descriptions  1 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
   Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
TABLE-FUNDED STRUCTURE FOR ALL CONSTRUCTION LOANS 
All construction loans close in the name of Flagstar Bank with the following requirements: 
•  Flagstar issues initial and all required additional Loan Estimates 
•  Flagstar underwrites all loans 
•  Flagstar issues all Closing Disclosures and closing packages 
•  Flagstar funds all loans 
 
AMORTIZATION STRUCTURE 
•  Interest only payment due on outstanding principal balance during construction 
•  After construction, loan converts to permanent phase with fully amortized payment over 30 years 
LOAN REGISTRATION 
•  Purpose type – Two loan purpose types are available for use under specific circumstances based on 
the borrower’s ownership status of the lot at the time of application: 
  “Construction” purpose type when borrower is not the owner of record at time of loan application 
o
(purchase)  
  “Construction Permanent” purpose type when borrower is the owner of record, regardless of 
o
length of time owned or how title was acquired (rate/term refinance) 
•  Loan term selection per “Loan Term for Registration” in the Products Offered section above 
•  Year Built field should be entered with the current year (not the year construction will be completed) 
•  Select “Proposed” in the Building Status field 
•  Prior to selecting a product the Construction Worksheet must be completed; the worksheet can be 
accessed in the Additional Loan Information section of the Loantrac Loan Application screen 
 
ADDITIONAL REGISTRATION STEPS FOR CONSTRUCTION TO PERMANENT (REFI) LOANS 
Construction Permanent loans are treated as rate/term refinance transactions.  Complete the following 
information in the Loantrac Loan Application screen to ensure the loan is properly registered: 
•  Complete the Construction Worksheet found in the Additional Loan Information section 
•  Real Estate section: 
  Find or enter the subject property record: 
o
  For the Indicator field, select “SUBJECT OF LOAN”  
  For the Disposition field, select “RETAINED-WILL BECOME PRIMARY OR 
ADDITIONAL RESIDENCE”  
  Enter the estimated as-completed value in the Present Market Value field.   
  The Mortgage Lien Amount field will display only the value of the land; this will be 
updated once the Liabilities section has been completed 
•  Liabilities section: 
  For the appropriate liability, enter the Builder’s Price to Build plus Unpaid Balance of Lot 
o
from the Construction Worksheet in the Balance field; the Mortgage Lien Amount field in the 
Real Estate section will update accordingly 
  Be sure “YES” is selected for the Paid By Close? slider 
o
•  Check Details of Transaction section to verify that the Refinance field reflects the cost of 
construction + outstanding lot loan balance 
V. Product Descriptions  2 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
   Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
•  Click “Save Loan” to go to the Rates & Pricing screen to select the construction loan product 
See EXHIBIT A for further detail. 
 
LOAN AMOUNTS 
MAXIMUM 
Refer to eligibility grids above 
 
MINIMUM  
Conforming High Balance Plus $1 
 
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  1-unit site-built homes 
•  Detached planned unit development (PUD) 
•  Detached condominium (site condo); must be fee simple interest for land and dwelling 
•  Modular homes 
•  Tear-downs & major renovation 
•  Properties where construction has already begun. 
  Confirmation is required that Flagstar’s first lien position is insurable by the title insurance 
o
provider for all construction completed prior to the closing of the loan. 
 
QUALIFYING RATE  
Note rate  
 
QUALIFYING PAYMENT 
Calculated using the Qualifying Rate above amortized over the 30-year permanent loan term. 
 
QUALIFYING RATIOS 
Maximum 45% 
 
INTERESTED PARTY CONTRIBUTIONS 
Interested party contributions include funds contributed by the property seller, builder, real estate agent/broker, mortgage 
lender, or their affiliates, or any other party with an interest in the real estate transaction. Interested party contributions 
may only be used for closing costs and prepaid expenses, and may never be applied to any portion of the down payment. 
 
CLTV/HCLTV  IPC Allowance 
> 80%  3% 
< 80%  6% 
 
TAX AND INSURANCE ESCROW 
Refer to Non-Agency Underwriting Guidelines guides for calculation method for qualifying taxes. 
 
DRAWS/FEES 
Refer to the Construction & Renovation Lending for fee requirements. 
V. Product Descriptions  3 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
   Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
 
CONSTRUCTION GUIDES 
Refer to Construction & Renovation Lending for information about the construction lending process. Executed 
borrower acknowledgement must be in the loan file. The construction guide and supporting documentation can 
be found under Construction Forms in the Seller’s Guide. 
 
Borrower and contractor must also be supplied with the appropriate State Statutory Form package and State 
Draw Requirement Letter. These can be found under Construction Forms in the Seller’s Guide. 
 
INSURANCE 
See Hazard Insurance Requirements, Doc. #4602 for insurance requirements during construction. 
FILE SUBMISSION 
BUILDER/PROJECT PACKAGE 
Builder and project packages must be submitted to Granite Loan Management for review. 
Builder/project packages must be submitted to:  
Granite Loan Management, LLC  
10770 Briarwood Ave., Suite 280  
Centennial, CO 80112  
Phone: (866) 380-9657  
Fax: (800) 919-8912  
Email: projects@graniteriskmanagement.com 
CREDIT PACKAGE 
Credit packages must be submitted to Underwriting through paperless loan submission and must include 
the executed Construction Guide Acknowledgement. 
 
APPRAISAL 
All appraisals must be ordered through Flagstar Loantrac from an approved Appraisal Management Company 
even if the customer has AIR Compliant status. All appraisals will be reviewed by the Appraisal Review 
Department. At minimum, a Collateral Desktop Analysis (CDA) or Consolidated Collateral Analysis (CCA) 
value reconciliation is needed when only one full appraisal is required or obtained. Refer to Document #4910, 
Clear Capital & Consolidated Analytics Product Requirements for complete details on value reconciliation, 
including instances when a Broker Price Opinion (BPO) may be required. 
 
Loan Amount  Appraisal Requirement at Loan Origination 
Up to $2,000,000  One Full Appraisal 
Greater than $2,000,000  Two Full Appraisals 
 
Obtain a new final appraisal to support LTV and confirm construction is complete. Only one appraisal is 
required at completion, regardless of loan amount. 
 
UNDERWRITING 
See below for product specific criteria. All additional guidelines not addressed below must meet the parameters 
documented in the Non-Agency Underwriting Guidelines. Product specific criteria may vary from the guidelines 
only as indicated below. 
 
V. Product Descriptions  4 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
   Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
All loans must be originated through a table-funded TPO transaction.     
•  All loans are underwritten by Flagstar 
•  Underwriting will review the contract to confirm the loan structure (construction period and related 
pricing) is supported by the contract or project size. 
•  Fourth-party transactions are not eligible. 
•  Project/builder will be reviewed by Granite Loan Management, LLC 
•  Cost to construct must be documented by fully executed “arm’s length” third-party builder contract.  
•  If construction has started it is subject to title company approval to insure prior to close 
•  The LTV ratio will be calculated as follows: 
  Construction purpose type (borrower not owner of record of lot):   
o
  Divide loan amount by the lesser of the total acquisition cost (sum of the cost of 
construction plus the purchase price of the lot) or the as completed appraised value of the 
property (lot and improvements) 
  Construction to Perm purpose type (borrower is owner of record): 
o
  Divide loan amount by as-completed appraised value of property (lot and improvements) 
  All payments made by the borrower directly to builder, or purchases of materials outside of the 
o
builder’s contract, will not be considered in the total acquisition cost calculation 
•  If the lot was acquired within 120 days of loan application, acquisition funds must be documented 
•  Sweat equity will not be accepted 
•  $2,000 or 2% cash back to borrower is not eligible on this program 
•  Interest Reserve Accounts to pay interest during the Construction Period are not eligible. Borrower 
must make an interest-only payment during the construction period 
•  Upon completion of construction: 
  Obtain a new final appraisal to support LTV and confirm construction is complete; only one 
o
appraisal is required at completion, regardless of loan amount 
  Verify mortgage remained current during the construction phase 
o
•  NEW CONSTRUCTION: All new construction properties require 5% contingency funds based on the 
total cost of improvements, excluding the cost/value of the land. The contingency may only be waived if 
the borrower can document 10% additional reserves after the down payment. 
•  RENOVATION: All renovation loans require a contingency reserve equal to at least 10% of the cost of 
renovations and must be included in the cost breakdown 
 
RESERVES  
Occupancy  Loan Amount  Required Reserves 1 
Up to $1,000,000  9 months, verified PITI 
Primary Residence   $1,000,001 - $1,500,000  21 months, verified PITI 
$1,500,001 – program maximum  27 months, verified PITI 
Up to $1,000,000  15 months, verified PITI 
Second Home  $1,000,001 - $1,500,000  21 months, verified PITI 
$1,500,001 – program maximum   27 months, verified PITI 
1.  When borrowers have financed properties in addition to the subject property, an additional 6 months PITI reserves are required for each property. 
 
Refer to the Underwriting Section for additional funds required for construction contingency reserves. 
V. Product Descriptions  5 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
   Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE 
Not required 
FLOOD INSURANCE 
A flood policy is required for any loan in a flood zone. 
•  The full policy must be issued prior to building vertically 
•  This may take up to 30 days for the agent to provide 
•  No exceptions will be issued 
TITLE INSURANCE 
Long-form title insurance must be obtained for all construction loans; short-form title policies are not acceptable. 
Title updates are required at the time of each draw. Ensure when you request your title quote that the title 
company understands the quote is for a construction loan. Long-form title is required, and the title quote must 
include the cost of endorsements required with each draw. 
For properties located in Illinois, all title commitments, updates and final policies must be provided by: 
•  First American Title 
•  Fidelity National Title 
•  Chicago Title 
•  Attorneys Title Guaranty 
 
For a smoother draw process with your construction loans you may wish to use one of these companies in all 
eligible states. 
EXTENSIONS OF CONSTRUCTION PERIOD 
Extensions may be granted, pursuant to a change order, if Lender reasonably believes work will not be done 
by the scheduled completion date. Maximum extension period is six whole months (extensions will not be 
granted for partial months). Flagstar Bank will charge a Construction Extension Fee of $1,000 per month if the 
construction is not completed by the pre-determined completion date.   
INTEREST RATE MODIFICATION REQUESTS 
During times of improved market rates available at the completion of construction, an interest rate modification 
may be eligible by request. Modifications must be requested prior to conversion of the loan to the fully 
amortized period. Contact the Construction Department for the current policy as project nears completion of 
construction. 
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
State/Territory  Restriction 
Puerto Rico  Not eligible 
Virgin Islands  Not eligible 
 
PREPAYMENT PENALTY 
None 
 
V. Product Descriptions  6 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
   Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Interim interest is not collected at closing.  Loans closing within the first seven days of the month cannot be 
closed with an interest credit. 
 
Maximum draw request from builder at closing is capped at 10% or $100,000 of the total cost to build, 
whichever is less. No further draws can occur until closing package has been received and post-closed by 
Flagstar Bank (usually 10 business days).   
ALL LOANS 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Fannie Mae multi-state Construction Loan Agreement, Form #3735 
•  Fannie Mae multi-state Construction Loan Addendum to Note, Form #3736 
•  Fannie Mae multi-state Construction Loan Rider to Security Instrument, Form #3737 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
 
IF APPLICABLE 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Condo Rider, Form #3140 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state PUD Rider, Form #3150 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Second Home Rider, Form #3890 
 
LENDER/SELLER CREDITS 
Lender/seller credits must be itemized when requesting funds. 
   
V. Product Descriptions  7 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
   Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
EXHIBIT A 
When registering a Construction to Perm loan, after completing the Additional Loan Information section, some 
of the information must be manually entered into the Real Estate and Liabilities sections. The estimated “As 
completed” appraised value must be entered as the Present Market Value on the Real Estate screen. The 
Unpaid Balance of Lot plus Builder’s Price to Build from the Construction worksheet is entered in the Liabilities 
balance field and marked as Paid by Close. 
 
  
V. Product Descriptions  8 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
   Jumbo One-Close Construction Fixed Rate 
 
 
 
 
V. Product Descriptions  9 of 9  Document #5724 
Return to Top    01/27/2023 

NEW PAGE