USDA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
USDA UNDERWRITING GUIDELINES 
•  HB-1-3555 Single Family Housing Guaranteed Loan Program Technical Handbook – Do not use 
consolidated version, as it has not been updated since March 2016 
•  Single Family Housing Quick Reference provides an index to the Handbook location of frequently 
requested information 
•  Subscribe to receive USDA updates 
•  Procedures Notices 
 
OVERLAYS 
AUTOMATED UNDERWRITING SYSTEM 
For Flagstar underwritten loans, due to system constraints, unless Flagstar has sponsored a lender, 
Flagstar must run GUS findings. 
 
CLOSING 
•  Borrowers may not close in trust 
•  Note must reflect a late fee of 5% 
 
CREDIT REPORTS 
For Flagstar underwritten loans where the customer has not been sponsored by Flagstar to run GUS, 
Credco credit report required for purchase and rate and term refinance transactions. Credit reports for 
Streamlined Assist loans need not be from Credco. For additional information, see Processes and 
Procedures section. 
 
CREDIT SCORES 
Minimum Credit Score: 
•  Purchase 1-Unit:  580 
•  Refinance 1-Unit: 580 
•  Streamline-Assist 1 Unit: 580 
 
ENERGY EFFICIENT ITEMS AND REPAIRS 
Repairs, including energy efficient improvements may not be financed into the loan amount. 
  VI. Underwriting Guidelines  2 of 7  11/22/2022
Return to Top 
 

NEW PAGE

 
   USDA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
ESCROW HOLDBACKS 
•  Allowed only a case by cases basis only for exterior property repairs that cannot be completed due 
to inclement weather 
•  Closing documents must be prepared through Flagstar’s Web-Based Closing Documents (WBCD) 
and all repair escrows for Flagstar-underwritten loans are held by Flagstar 
•  Two bids required 
 
POWER OF ATTORNEY 
•  Powers of Attorney may not be e-signed 
 
PROPERTY ELIGIBILITY 
INELIGIBLE 
•  Properties located in American Samoa, Guam, The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands and Puerto Rico 
•  Manufactured homes 
•  Properties located in Hawaiian Homelands. 
 
PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES 
4506-C 
•  If the 4506-C transcripts do not match the borrower’s income and the borrower is a victim of 
taxpayer  identification theft, the following conditions must be met in order to validate the borrower’s 
income: 
Proof of identification theft as evidenced by one of the following:  
o 
  Proof ID theft was reported to and received by the IRS (IRS form 14039) OR 
  Copy of notification from the IRS alerting the taxpayer to possible identification theft 
  In addition to one of the documents above, all applicable documents below must be 
o
provided: 
  W2 or 1099 transcripts which match the W2 or 1099 income shown on the 1040s 
  1099 mortgage interest must match the reported interest on Schedule A or Schedule 
E 
  1099G unemployment must match the reported amount of unemployment 
  1099 dividend and interest income must match the reported dividend and interest 
  Validation of prior tax year’s income (income for current year must be in line with 
prior years) 
 
APPRAISAL 
PORTABILITY 
•  To transfer a Flagstar appraisal to another lender, refer to the Transfer Appraisal From Flagstar 
to another lender section of Conventional Underwriting Guidelines 
•  Appraisals already performed for a case number that was subsequently transferred to Flagstar 
must be emailed in .pdf format to appraisal.review@flagstar.com by one of the following: 
The original lender to whom the loan was initially submitted or  
o 
The appraisal management company providing the appraisal or 
o 
The appraiser 
o 
 
  VI. Underwriting Guidelines  3 of 7  11/22/2022
Return to Top 
 

NEW PAGE

 
   USDA Underwriting Guidelines 
PROPERTY ADDRESSES 
The property addresses on the appraisal, mortgage, note, flood certification and in Loantrac must be 
identical.  However, abbreviation of “Street,” “Road,” etc. is acceptable, even if “Street” or “Road” is fully 
spelled in another document. This is the only acceptable variance. 
•  Use the standardized USPS address unless the address in the legal description on the title 
commitment differs. If the legal address differs, use the legal address 
•  Appraisers are required to state the USPS address as the property address on the first line of 
the appraisal.  If the legal address differs from the USPS address, the appraiser must reference 
the legal address in a comment on the appraisal or an addendum to the appraisal 
 
CLOSING REQUIREMENTS 
•  Interest credit allowed - Loan must close by the 7th calendar day of the month preceding the first 
payment date 
•  All conditions must be collected and provided in the closing package 
Down payment assistance funds are typically wired to the closing agent – Wire transfer 
o 
documentation must be included in the file prior to funding or purchase 
•  Any changes to the terms of USDA’s commitment must be reviewed by underwriter and USDA prior 
to closing and disbursing loan 
•  Principal reductions are required when the total of lender and/or seller credits reflected on the 
Closing Disclosure exceeds the total of the actual closing costs, pre-paid expenses and discount 
points 
•  Principal reductions are required when the borrower receives any cash back at a purchase 
transaction closing 
Documented funds paid by the borrower for EMD only may be refunded to the borrower at 
o 
closing 
•  Closing documents must be signed and notarized on or before the closing date indicated on the 
closing documents, regardless of the state in which the property is located and/or whether it’s an 
escrow state 
 
ESCROW STATES 
•  Arizona  •  Hawaii  •  Nevada  •  Utah 
•  California  •  Idaho  •  New Mexico  •  Washington 
•  Colorado  •  Montana  •  Oregon  •  Wyoming 
 
NOTARY POLICY 
Refer to the Notary Policy stated in Settlement/Closing Requirements, Doc. #4601 
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
Transactions in which the realtor and the originator are the same individual are ineligible. 
 
CREDIT REPORTS 
For Flagstar underwritten loans where the customer has not been sponsored by Flagstar to run GUS, if the 
credit report provided at loan submission is not a Credco credit report, the underwriter will order one. The 
information, including credit scores, on the Credco credit report will be used to underwrite the loan. 
 
DE CUSTOMERS ONLY 
•  Credit report must contain Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) screening 
  VI. Underwriting Guidelines  4 of 7  11/22/2022
Return to Top 
 

NEW PAGE

 
   USDA Underwriting Guidelines 
•  If credit report indicates a potential OFAC match, the credit report must be e-mailed to 
delegated.underwriting@flagstar.com for review by Flagstar Bank’s Secrecy Act Compliance 
Department – The loan may not close without clearance from Flagstar’s BSA Department 
(violation of this policy is a federal crime) 
 
DOWN PAYMENT 
All community second and grant programs must be Flagstar-eligible - Refer to Gift/Grant Programs, 
Doc. #5935 or Community Seconds Programs, Doc. #5932. 
 
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES 
•  Electronic signatures are permitted for all USDA loan documents except the following: 
  Powers of Attorney 
o
  Note and Mortgage 
o
 
ESCROWS 
•  Escrow waivers not allowed 
•  Escrows are required for all of the following: 
  Real estate taxes 
o
  Monthly mortgage insurance premiums 
o
  Hazard insurance premiums, including flood insurance, wind insurance, etc. 
o
  Special assessments 
o
  Ground rents 
o
•  Generally, property tax escrows for all new construction properties must be calculated based on the 
fully assessed property value. Obtain actual tax amounts from the local tax assessor’s office. If the 
new construction property taxes charged by the municipality will not be based on the fully improved 
   property within 12 months of closing, escrows may be based on one of the following. Regardless of 
assessment dates, ratios and reserves must be calculated based on the fully assessed property 
value: 
  Lot only; or 
o
  A partial assessment; or 
o
  Actual or estimated amount based on fully assessed value 
o
•  The Closing Department will require the borrower(s) to confirm that once the property is fully 
assessed, they are aware of the potential escrow shortage 
•  For purchases of new and existing properties in California only, property taxes may be calculated 
using 1.25% of the purchase price or the actual tax rate 
 
ESCROW HOLDBACKS 
•  Allowed on a case by cases basis only for exterior property repairs that cannot be completed due to 
inclement weather 
•  Fully executed Escrow Holdback Agreement, Doc. #3655 required in closing package 
 
INSURANCE 
HAZARD INSURANCE 
Hazard Insurance Requirements, Doc. #4602 
 
FLOOD INSURANCE 
  VI. Underwriting Guidelines  5 of 7  11/22/2022
Return to Top 
 

NEW PAGE

 
   USDA Underwriting Guidelines 
•  Flood Insurance - Broker & Non Delegated Correspondent, Doc. #4603 or Flood Insurance - 
Delegated Correspondent, Doc. #4603-A. 
•  Eligible Flood Provider Companies- FEMA Flood Insurance Company List 
•  Private flood insurance meeting the requirements of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform 
Act of 2012, however, all improvements, including detached structures must be insured. 
•  Flood insurance must cover the lesser of the outstanding principal balance of the loan or the 
maximum amount of coverage allowed under FEMA’s National Flood Insurance Program 
(NFIP).  Unless a higher amount is allowed by state or federal law (which includes FEMA 
policies), the maximum deductible clause for a flood insurance policy should not exceed the 
greater of $1,000, or one percent of the face amount of the policy, or the minimum deductible 
offered by the borrowers chosen insurance carrier. 
 
LOAN TERM 
30 year fixed rate mortgage 
 
NET TANGIBLE BENEFIT 
A net tangible benefit form must be completed when required by the state. 
 
POWER OF ATTORNEY 
•  All signatures on the power of attorney must be notarized, and the power of attorney must be 
reviewed by a Flagstar underwriter. All signatures must match the signatures in the file 
•  Unless the POA is a military Durable POA, the POA must be specific to Flagstar Bank’s loan and 
indicate the property address 
•  POA is not allowed for single borrower transactions unless Flagstar Bank has borrower experience 
and the underwriter can compare signatures from previous transaction(s) 
 
REFINANCE TRANSACTIONS 
Pooling Restrictions for Streamlined Refinance and Cash-Out Refinance Loans: 
•  Must meet the following seasoning requirements when the being paid off is a government loan 
(FHA, VA or USDA); and 
•  The borrower must of made at least six consecutive monthly payments on the loan being 
refinanced, beginning with the date the payment was made for the first payment due date; and 
•  The first payment due date of the refinance loan occurs no earlier than 210 days after the first 
payment due date of the initial loan. 
 
TITLE 
Effective date of title commitment must be no older than 90 days as of initial underwrite and within 120 
days of the note. 
 
ENERGY LOAN TAX ASSESSMENT PROGRAM (ELTAP) LIENS 
Not permitted 
 
UNEXPIRED RIGHTS OF REDEMPTION – ALL STATES EXCEPT ALABAMA 
•  Unless the property is located in the State of Alabama, Flagstar will not approve and/or purchase 
any loan having an unexpired right of redemption unless the purchase agreement, title           
and appraisal all show the same seller who is the original mortgagor 
  Title may show lis pendens notices from the bank or mortgagee 
o
•  Purchase contract may indicate a short sale 
  VI. Underwriting Guidelines  6 of 7  11/22/2022
Return to Top 
 

NEW PAGE

 
   USDA Underwriting Guidelines 
•  Unexpired Rights of Redemption – Alabama Only 
  Purchase agreement, title and appraisal will be in the name of the lender and not the 
o
original mortgagor. 
  Title commitment will show one or both of the following acceptable recorded deeds: 
o
  Foreclosure from John Doe (original mortgagor) to Anybank (foreclosing lender) 
followed by the date on the deed and the recording date 
  When the foreclosing lender deeds the property to HUD, Fannie Mae, Freddie 
Mac, VA or GNMA, there will be a special warranty deed from Anybank 
(foreclosing lender) to one of the GSEs listed above followed by the date on the 
deed and the recording date 
  If the above referenced deeds are dated within the most recent 12 months, the title 
o
commitment must contain a specific exception for the unexpired right of redemption and 
affirmatively insure, without qualification, the mortgagee (Flagstar Bank) against all 
losses arising out of the exercise of any outstanding right of redemption 
 
UNDERWRITING TURN TIMES 
Current underwriting turn times are posted on Flagstar’s website. 
  VI. Underwriting Guidelines  7 of 7  11/22/2022
Return to Top 
 

NEW PAGE