FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
FHA UNDERWRITING GUIDELINES  
•  HUD Handbook 4000.1 –  Single Family Housing Policy Handbook 
•  FHA Single Family Housing Policy Handbook Glossary 
  
OVERLAYS   
4506-C 
•  A fully executed IRS Form 4506-C must be included in all loan files, except for FHA Non-Credit 
Qualifying Streamlines  
•  1040 transcripts are required for the following income types: 
  Self-employed 
o
  Rental income documented on Schedule E 
o
  Employed by family 
o
  When tax returns are utilized to determine qualifying income, in lieu of alternative 
o
documentation options when applicable 
 
ASSETS 
SWEAT EQUITY 
Not allowed 
 
BUY-DOWNS 
Ineligible 
 
CLOSING 
CLOSING IN TRUST 
•  For loans closing in a trust, a Certificate of Trust (Lending), Doc. #3954 or similar form is 
required. For properties located in California, the California Trust Certificate, Doc. #3951 or 
similar form may be used. 
 
CONDOMINIUMS 
Flagstar does not participate in DELRAP 
 
CREDIT REPORTS 
Credit reports for Streamline refinances must be tri-merge credit reports 
CREDIT SCORES 
MINIMUM CREDIT SCORES  
Minimum FHA Credit Scores 
Loan Purpose  Minimum Credit Score 
Purchase 1-2 Unit/PUD/Condo/Manufactured Home/203k 1  580 
Purchase 3-4 Units/203k1  580 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  3 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
Minimum FHA Credit Scores 
Loan Purpose  Minimum Credit Score 
Rate and Term Refinance and Simple Refinance 1-2 
580 
Unit/PUD/Condo/Manufactured Home/203k 1 
Rate and Term Refinance and Simple Refinance 3-4 Units   580 
Rate and Term Refinance 3-4 Units 203k 1  580 
Cash-Out Refinance 1-2 Unit/PUD/Condo/Manufactured Home   580 
Cash-Out Refinance 3-4 Units   580 
Streamline Refinance 1-2 Unit/PUD/Condo/Manufactured Home   580 
Streamline Refinance 3-4 Units  580 
1.  203k available for approved DE Delegated Correspondents only 
 
DOWN PAYMENT ASSISTANCE 
All community second and grant programs must be Flagstar-eligible.  Refer to Gift/Grant Programs, Doc. 
#5935 or Community Seconds Programs, Doc. #5932. 
 
ESCROW HOLDBACKS - REPAIRS 
•  Closing documents must be prepared through Flagstar’s Web-Based Closing Documents (WBCD), 
and all repair escrows for Flagstar-underwritten loans are held by Flagstar 
•  Two bids required for all repair escrows except HUD REO  
  Escrow holdback will be 1½ times the highest bid - Bids may not exceed $6,666 for 
o
maximum escrow holdback of $10,000.  Note:  Overlay does not apply to purchases of HUD 
REO properties where FHA permits $10,000 in repairs and $11,000 repair escrow or 
properties subject to disaster repairs where FHA limits the repair escrow to $5,000. 
 
MANUFACTURED HOMES 
•  Property must be a double-wide (multi-width) manufactured home 
•  Property must be existing manufactured home on a permanent foundation and previously converted 
to real estate: 
  Purchase transaction will be eligible for subsequent purchase only  
o
  New construction manufactured home or manufactured home dealer purchases are ineligible 
o
  Refinance of interim construction financing of a manufactured home are ineligible 
o
•  Manufactured home may not be located in a Condominium, Cooperative or have leasehold interest. 
•  Manufactured homes that have been moved from their original site are ineligible. 
 
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FLAGSTAR BANK LOANS 
Flagstar will not approve and close or purchase loans for borrowers having more than ten loans with 
Flagstar Bank or having an aggregate loan amount ≥ $4,000,000. The maximum number of loans and 
aggregate loan amount calculations include all of the following: 
•  Non-closed loans with Flagstar Bank 
•  Loans that are closed and currently serviced by Flagstar Bank 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  4 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
•  Loans that were closed with Flagstar Bank but the servicing rights have been sold to another lender 
within the most recent 24 months 
 
MCC CREDITS 
Permitted for Correspondent lenders who close in their own names 
 
POWER OF ATTORNEY 
•  Cash-out transactions may not close with any power of attorney other than a military durable power 
of attorney 
•  Powers of Attorney may not be e-signed 
 
PRODUCTS AND PROGRAMS 
INELIGIBLE PROGRAMS 
•  203(K) and Limited 203(k) 
•  Title I Loans 
•  Home Equity Conversion Mortgages (Reverse Mortgages) 
•  Section 247 – Hawaiian Homelands 
•  Section 248 – Indian Reservations 
•  Section 184 – Indian Home Loan Guarantee Program 
•  Section 223(e) – Declining Neighborhoods 
•  Energy Efficient Mortgages 
 
PROPERTY ELIGIBILITY 
INELIGIBLE 
•  Properties located in American Samoa, Guam, The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands and Puerto Rico 
•  Investment properties under the HUD REO program 
 
SECTION 8 HOUSING VOUCHERS 
Due to system constraints, subsidies paid directly to the servicer are not permitted and may not be 
deducted from the borrower’s proposed housing payment when calculating the ratios. 
 
PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES 
Processes and Procedures describe how to use Flagstar’s systems and tools to achieve FHA, GNMA and 
Flagstar requirements. 
4506-C 
•  If the 4506-C transcripts do not match the borrower’s income and the borrower is a victim of 
taxpayer identification theft, the following conditions must be met in order to validate the borrower’s 
income. 
  Proof of identification theft as evidenced by one of the following: 
o
  Proof ID theft was reported to and received by the IRS (IRS form 14039) OR 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  5 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
  Copy of notification from the IRS alerting the taxpayer to possible identification theft 
  In addition to one of the documents above, all applicable documents below must be 
o
provided: 
  W2 or 1099 transcripts which match the W2 or 1099 income shown on the 1040s 
  1099 mortgage interest must match the reported interest on Schedule A or Schedule 
E 
  1099G unemployment must match the reported amount of unemployment 
  1099 dividend and interest income must match the reported dividend and interest 
  Validation of prior tax year’s income (income for current year must be in line with 
prior years) 
 
APPRAISALS 
The required method for ordering appraisals is based on each lender’s approval type with Flagstar and 
FHA.   
•  If Flagstar must be the client on the appraisal, order the appraisal through Loantrac Appraisal 
Management 
•  For additional information and links to Flagstar-approved appraisal management companies, refer 
to Appraisal Management Companies, Doc. #4903 
 
Description  Underwriting  Close in Own Name  Client on Appraisal 
FHA Authorized Agent  Flagstar  Yes  Flagstar or Correspondent 1,3 
FHA Test Case Phase  Lender  Yes  Correspondent 3 
FHA Direct Endorsement  Lender  Yes  Correspondent 3 
FHA Sponsored Originator  Flagstar  No  Flagstar 
TCP2 Dual/Sponsored Originator  Flagstar  Yes  Correspondent 3 
TCP2 Dual/Sponsored Originator  Lender  Yes  Correspondent 3 
FHA Dual/AA  Flagstar  Yes  Flagstar or Correspondent 1 
FHA Dual/AA  Lender  Yes  Correspondent 3 
FHA SO AA  Flagstar  Yes  Correspondent 3 
1.  Flagstar must approve the correspondent for appraisal independence compliance.   If the correspondent is not approved for appraisal independence 
compliance, the appraisal must be ordered through Loantrac Appraisal Management. 
2.  TCP refers to an FHA lender in its test case phase. 
3.  Appraiser must be Flagstar-eligible and must not be on Flagstar’s ineligible or denied appraiser list.  If the eligible appraiser search indicates the 
appraiser is inactive, expired or suspended, prior to ordering the appraisal, submit the appropriate documentation to Appraiser.Approval@flagstar.com.  
 
PORTABILITY 
•  To transfer a Flagstar appraisal to another lender, refer to the Transfer Appraisal From Flagstar 
to Another Lender section of Conventional Underwriting Guidelines 
•  Appraisals already performed for a case number that was subsequently transferred to Flagstar 
must be emailed in .xml format to appraisal.review@flagstar.com by one of the following: 
  The original DE lender to whom the loan was initially submitted or 
o
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  6 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
  The appraisal management company providing the appraisal or 
o
  The appraiser 
o
 
PROPERTY ADDRESSES 
The property addresses on the appraisal, case number assignment, flood certification, mortgage, note 
and in Loantrac must be identical. However, abbreviation of Street, Road, etc. is acceptable, even if 
Street or Road is fully spelled in another document. This is the only acceptable variance. 
•  Use the standardized USPS address. Compare the USPS address to the legal description on 
the title commitment and use the address in the legal description if that differs from the USPS 
address 
•  Appraisers are required to state the USPS address as the property address on the appraisal.  If 
the legal address differs from the USPS address, the appraiser must reference the legal 
address in a comment on the appraisal or an addendum to the appraisal 
 
SECOND APPRAISAL POLICY – DEFICIENT APPRAISALS 
Flagstar DE underwriters adhere to the following policies and processes when determining whether an 
appraisal contains material deficiencies: 
•  If the underwriter determines there are flaws and/or material deficiencies, he or she contacts the 
appraiser and requests necessary revisions, clarification, additional supporting documentation 
and/or missing data 
•  If the appraiser fails to provide the information or provides insufficient data and the appraisal still 
contains material deficiencies, the appraisal is forwarded to the Appraisal Review team for 
analysis 
•  A prior-to-close condition indicating the appraisal has been forwarded to Appraisal Review is 
added to the loan 
•  Upon receipt of the Appraisal Review team member’s comments, the DE underwriter 
determines whether a new appraisal is warranted 
  If not warranted, the conditional commitment is issued based on the original appraisal 
o
  If the original appraisal contains significant flaws, the DE Underwriter requests a second 
o
Appraisal through the Appraisal Review team.  Even if the originating lender has been 
approved for Appraiser Independence Compliance, second appraisals due to significant 
flaws may never be ordered by anyone other than the DE Underwriter  
BORROWERS 
BORROWER’S NAME 
•  The borrower’s name on the case number assignment must match the borrower’s name in 
Loantrac and the note and mortgage 
  The following name discrepancies are the only acceptable variations: 
o
  James Everett Brown, James E. Brown, James Brown 
  William Smith Jr., William Smith, William R. Smith, William Ryan Smith, Jr., 
William Ryan Smith, William R. Smith, Jr. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  7 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
  The following name discrepancies must be resolved prior to the loan closing (this list is 
o
not all-inclusive and name discrepancies are reviewed on a case-by-case basis): 
  Name discrepancies due to marriage (Case number shows Mary Smith, but 
documentation in Loantrac and/or the note and mortgage shows Mary Jones) 
  Hyphenated name discrepancies (Case number shows Bill Smith, but 
documentation in Loantrac and/or the note and mortgage shows Bill Smith-
Jones) 
  Middle name discrepancies (Case number shows Bill John Smith, but 
documentation in Loantrac and/or the note and mortgage shows Bill Robert 
Smith) 
  First name discrepancies (Case number shows Bill Smith, but documentation in 
Loantrac and/or the note and mortgage shows William Smith) 
  Last name prefix discrepancies (Case number shows Bill St. Pete, but 
documentation in Loantrac and/or the note and mortgage shows Bill Stpete) 
 
CASE NUMBER ASSIGNMENT/TRANSFER 
CASE NUMBER FUNCTIONS 
•  Case numbers for Sponsored Originators must be ordered through Flagstar Bank’s Loantrac 
System.  
•  Case numbers for lenders in “eligible for pre-closing” status with FHA (test case phase) must be 
ordered by Flagstar. Submit a completed Case Number Assignment Request, Doc. #9301 to 
fsgovlend@flagstar.com. 
•  If the case number cannot be ordered through Loantrac because the loan was submitted to 
underwriting prior to case number assignment or update of an existing Flagstar case number is 
required, complete FHA Case Number Assignment Request, Doc. #9301 and submit to 
fsgovlend@flagstar.com. 
•  To obtain a copy of the Refinance Authorization screen for FHA to FHA refinance transactions, 
complete FHA Refinance Credit Query/Authorization Request, Doc. #9353 and submit to 
fsgovlend@flagstar.com.  Note:  When requesting an FHA to FHA refinance case number 
through Loantrac, a Refinance Authorization is automatically provided.   
•  To obtain a case number transfer from Flagstar to another DE lender, complete FHA Case 
Number Transfer Request, Doc. #9352 and submit to fsgovlend@flagstar.com. 
•  If a Flagstar case number requires cancellation, email fsgovlend@flagstar.com.  The email 
request must contain the borrower’s name, loan number, FHA case number and reason for case 
cancellation. 
•  Flagstar cannot perform case number functions for case numbers that are not already in 
Flagstar’s name. The DE lender to whom the case number is assigned is responsible for all 
case number functions. 
 
CASE NUMBER ASSIGNMENT – DATA ENTRY 
When entering the case number assignment date in Loantrac, enter the “Case Received” date from the 
Case Query screen in FHA Connection. 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  8 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
CLOSING REQUIREMENTS 
NOTARY POLICY 
Refer to the Notary Policy stated in Settlement/Closing Requirements, Doc. #4601 
 
 
CLOSING - MISCELLANEOUS 
•  For FHA to FHA refinance transactions, the up-front mortgage insurance premium refund must 
be credited to the borrower on the Closing Disclosure 
•  All closing/funding conditions must be collected and provided in the closing package 
•  Any changes to loan amount, upfront MIP, cash-to-close, interest rate, points, PITI, etc. must be 
reviewed by underwriting prior to closing and disbursing loan 
•  Principal reductions are required when the total of lender and/or seller credits reflected on the 
Closing Disclosure exceeds the total of the actual closing costs, pre-paid expenses and 
discount points 
•  Principal reductions are required when the borrower is receiving more than $500 cash at closing 
on a rate and term or streamline refinance loan.  However, if the borrower has requested to 
apply the existing escrow balance to the closing costs and pre-paid expenses on the new loan 
and the existing escrow balance exceeds the amount required to pay closing costs and 
establish the new escrow account by more than $500, the borrower may receive the excess 
funds in cash at closing. This is the only acceptable reason for a borrower to receive more than 
$500 cash back at closing on a rate and term or streamline refinance.  
•  Closing documents must be signed and notarized on or before the closing date indicated on the 
closing documents, regardless of the state in which the property is located and/or whether it’s 
an escrow state 
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
The loan officer cannot receive compensation from any other person or entity involved in the mortgage 
transaction, (i.e. compensation as the real estate agent). 
 
CREDIT REPORTS 
AGE OF CREDIT REPORTS 
•  To achieve Flagstar’s and FHA’s minimum credit requirements, a new credit report may be re-
pulled after a borrower has repaired derogatory credit, and Flagstar will honor the new credit 
score.  The new credit report must be imported to Loantrac 
•  The following credit report discrepancies require a new credit report: 
  Social Security number is incorrect 
o
  Last name is incorrect 
o
  Middle initial is incorrect 
o
  Misspelled first names and/or missing or incorrect suffixes (Jr./Sr.) require a new credit 
o
report unless the name variation appears in the AKA section of the credit report 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  9 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
DE CUSTOMERS ONLY 
•  Credit report must contain Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) screening 
•  If credit report indicates a potential OFAC match, the credit report must be e-mailed to 
Delegated.Underwriting@Flagstar.com for review by Flagstar Bank’s Secrecy Act Compliance 
Department – The loan may not close without clearance from Flagstar’s BSA Department 
(violation of this policy is a federal crime) 
 
DISCLOSURES/FORMS 
REQUIRED DISCLOSURES AND FORMS 
•  In addition to the other forms listed in Government Forms and Disclosures, Doc. #9005, 
HUD/VA Addendum to Uniform Residential Loan Application, HUD Form 92900-a is required for 
all FHA loans. Lender and sponsor information on the form is based on the originating lender’s 
relationship with FHA and/or Flagstar Bank. Complete the fields described below in the following 
manner: 
  Sponsored Originators (TPOs), including loans underwritten by Flagstar for an 
o
Authorized Agent who is still in their test case phase and has only conditional FHA 
approval (pre-closing review status) 
  Page 1 Part I: Flagstar Bank is the Mortgagee 
•  Mortgagee ID - Enter Flagstar’s FHA Lender ID – 7127400001 
•  Sponsor ID and Agent ID - Leave Blank 
•  Enter Flagstar’s name, address and phone number: Flagstar Bank, 5151 
Corporate Drive, Troy, MI 48098, (800) 945-7700 
•  Name address of Sponsor and Agent – Leave Blank 
•  FHA Sponsored Originations Section – Enter the loan originating lender’s 
company name, company Tax ID and company NMLS ID 
Part II:   
•  Borrower(s) Name, Date of Birth and Social Security Number must be 
completed 
•  Form must be signed by borrower(s) at initial application 
  Page 2: 
•  No Lender/sponsor info 
•  Form must be signed by borrower(s) at initial application 
  Page 3: 
•  Form is signed by Flagstar’s underwriter 
  Page 4: 
•  Mortgagee – Flagstar Bank 
•  Title of Flagstar Representative and Signature – A Flagstar 
Representative must sign at the time of insuring – No originator signature 
is required 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  10 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
  Loans Underwritten by Flagstar as Authorized Agent for an FHA-approved DE Lender 
o
who has completed their test cases and is unconditionally approved by FHA 
  Page 1 Part I: 
•  Enter Mortgagee ID - originating lender’s FHA lender ID  
•  Enter Agent ID Flagstar’s FHA Lender ID - 7127400001 
•  Enter Mortgagee originating lender’s name, address and phone number  
•  Enter Flagstar’s name and address: Flagstar Bank, 5151 Corporate Drive, 
Troy, MI 48098 
•  FHA Sponsored Originations – Leave Blank 
•  A Mortgagee Representative (not the loan officer or originator) of the 
originating lender’s company must sign – No originator signature is 
required - Must not be signed prior to the borrower signing page 2 
Part II:   
•  Borrower(s) Name, Date of Birth and Social Security Number must be 
completed 
•  Form must be signed by borrower(s) at initial application 
  Page 2: 
•  No Lender/sponsor info 
•  Form must be signed by borrower(s) at initial application 
  Page 3: 
•  No Lender/Sponsor info 
•  Form is signed by Flagstar’s underwriter 
  Page 4: 
•  Mortgagee – Originating lender’s name 
•  A Mortgagee Representative officer (not the loan officer or originator) of 
the originating lender’s company must sign – No originator signature is 
required 
  Loans Underwritten by Flagstar-approved DE Delegated Correspondents 
o
  Page 1 Part I: 
•  Mortgagee ID - Enter DE Delegated correspondent’s FHA lender ID  
•  Sponsor ID and Agent ID - Leave blank 
•  Enter DE Delegated correspondent’s name and address 
•  FHA Sponsored Originations – Leave Blank 
•  A Mortgagee Representative (not the loan officer or originator) of the DE 
Delegated correspondent’s company must sign – No originator signature 
is required -– Must not be signed prior to the borrower signing page 2 
Part II:   
•  Borrower(s) Name, Date of Birth and Social Security Number must be 
completed 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  11 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
•  Form must be signed by borrower(s) at initial application 
  Page 2: 
•  No Lender/sponsor info 
•  Form must be signed by borrower(s) at initial application 
  Page 3: 
•  Form is signed by DE Delegated correspondent’s underwriter 
  Page 4: 
•  Mortgagee – DE Delegated correspondent’s name 
•  A Mortgagee Representative (not the loan officer or originator) of the DE 
Delegated correspondent’s company must sign – No originator signature 
is required 
 
For additional FHA document and disclosure requirements, refer to Government Forms and 
Disclosures, Doc. #9005. 
 
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES 
Electronic signatures are permitted for all FHA loan documents except the following: 
•  Powers of attorney 
•  Form SSA-89 
•  Note  
 
ESCROWS 
•  Escrow waivers not allowed  
•  Escrows are required for all of the following: 
  Real estate taxes 
o
  Monthly mortgage insurance premiums 
o
  Hazard insurance premiums, including flood insurance, wind insurance, etc. 
o
  Special assessments  
o
  Ground rents 
o
•  Unless the loan has one of the following characteristics, property tax escrows are calculated using 
the taxes stated on the title commitment, regardless of the rate used to calculate the borrower’s 
debt-to-income ratios: 
  When calculating the real estate tax payment for existing (not new construction) properties, 
o
the following documentation may be used: 
  Taxes listed on the title commitment or property tax bill/cert or 
  Evidence from the local assessor’s office of the current tax rate 
  For properties being purchased from a seller who paid non-homestead taxes, the title 
o
commitment will indicate the non-homestead tax rate.  Homestead tax rates may be used to 
calculate the borrower’s ratios, provided evidence of the homestead tax rate is obtained 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  12 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
from the local tax assessor’s office.  Lenders must collect escrows based on the amount 
shown on the title commitment. 
  Generally, property tax escrows for all new construction properties must be calculated based 
o
on the fully assessed property value. Obtain actual tax amounts from the local tax 
assessor’s office. If the new construction property taxes charged by the municipality will not 
be based on the fully improved property within 12 months of closing, escrows may be based 
on one of the following. Note:  Regardless of assessment dates, ratios and reserves must 
be calculated based on the fully assessed property value. 
  Lot only; or 
  A partial assessment; or 
  Actual or estimated amount based on fully assessed value 
  The Closing Department will require the borrower(s) to confirm that once the property is fully 
o
assessed, they are aware of the potential escrow shortage  
  For purchases of new and existing properties in California only, property taxes may be 
o
calculated using 1.25% of the purchase price or the actual tax rate 
 
ESCROW HOLDBACKS - REPAIRS 
In addition to FHA’s repair escrow requirements and Flagstar’s overlays above, the following 
documents and clarifications apply: 
•  Fully executed Escrow Holdback Agreement, Doc. #3655 required in closing package 
•  For additional repair escrow information, refer to Escrow Holdback Procedures, Doc. #4634 
•  For new construction properties, items such as pools, decks, sod, etc. may remain incomplete 
due to weather-related situations. Escrow holdback will be amount indicated on building 
agreement, contract and/or vendor agreement.   
•  For purchases of bank-owned properties, approval of repair escrow is granted on a case-by-
case basis for completion of exterior repairs that cannot be completed due to inclement 
weather. 
 
HIGHER PRICED MORTGAGE LOANS (HPML) 
Loans having an APR that is ≥ 1.5% above the APOR on the date the loan locked are classified as an 
HPML. All HPMLs must meet the following requirements: 
•  Pre-payment penalties are not permitted  
•  The interest rate cannot adjust within the first seven years of the loan – FHA ARMs classified as 
HPMLs are ineligible 
•  Escrows must be collected for the life of the loan 
•  Streamline refinance transactions are eligible, provided they are credit qualified 
•  For FHA transactions that are considered Safe Harbor QM that are HPML for purposes of Section 
35, please reference Higher Priced Mortgage Loans (HPML), Doc. #4813. Loans that have a QM 
status of Rebuttable Presumption are required to have a Residual Income Worksheet, this form is 
not applicable to delegated loans. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  13 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
 
INDUSTRY LINKS/FLAGSTAR LINKS/CONTACTS 
•  FHA Mortgage Limits Search Engine 
•  FHA Approved Condos Search Engine 
•  HUD Training Archives 
•  HUD Training and Events Page 
•  HUD’s Lender Page 
•  FHA Connection  
•  Government Services Administration (GSA) Excluded Parties Search Engine 
•  Limited Denials of Participation (LDP) Excluded Parties Search Engine 
•  Flagstar Bank Wholesale Website 
•  Flagstar Bank Government Underwriting Help Desk  
  E-Mail: GovernmentUW@Flagstar.com 
o
  Phone: 866-945-9872, Option 1 for Underwriting, then Option 2 for Government 
o
Underwriting 
•  HUD’s Listserv email distribution that announces FHA changes and available training: 
Sign up for the mailing list: https://www.hud.gov/subscribe/signup 
INSURANCE 
HAZARD INSURANCE 
Hazard Insurance Requirements, Doc. #4602 
 
FLOOD INSURANCE 
•  Flood Insurance - Broker & Non-Delegated Correspondent, Doc. #4603 
•  Eligible Flood Provider Companies, - FEMA Flood Insurance Company List 
•  Flood insurance policy must be a NFIP policy and must cover all improvements, including 
detached structures. Flood insurance provided by private providers is not permitted  
•  If the subject property is a condominium-unit, the NFIP policy must be obtained by the 
homeowner’s association. Borrower purchased flood insurance is not permitted unless the 
property is a site condominium. Loans must be denied if the HOA does not maintain adequate 
flood insurance, regardless of FHA condominium approval status 
 
CONDOMINIUM FIDELITY/LIABILITY INSURANCE 
•  Hazard Insurance Requirements, Doc. #4602 
•  Each project must have $1,000,000 business liability insurance coverage with the HOA named 
as the insured 
•  Projects having > 20 units must show evidence of Fidelity (employee dishonesty) coverage ≥ 
three months HOA income with the HOA named as the insured 
•  Site Condominiums – Liability insurance is not required 
•  Must be provided prior-to-close 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  14 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
 
HO-6 POLICY 
For coverage requirements, refer to Hazard Insurance Requirements, Doc. #4602 
 
LOAN TERMS 
FIXED RATE MORTGAGES 
10, 15, 20, 25 and 30-year fixed rate mortgages 
 
ARMS 
3/1 and 5/1 CMT adjustable-rate mortgages 
 
MAXIMUM LOAN AMOUNT 
Maximum Loan calculations are published in the 9000 series of our Sellers Guide: 
•  FHA Maximum Mortgage Worksheet - Purchase, Doc. #9328 
•  FHA Maximum Mortgage Worksheet - Rate & Term Refinance, Doc. #9342 
•  FHA Maximum Mortgage Worksheet - Simple Refinance, Doc. #9346 
•  FHA Maximum Mortgage Worksheet - Cash-Out Refinance, Doc. #9345 
•  FHA Maximum Mortgage Worksheet - Streamline Refinance, Doc. #9347 
 
NET TANGIBLE BENEFIT 
NET TANGIBLE BENEFIT CALCULATION WORKSHEETS 
To calculate the borrower’s net tangible benefit for Streamline refinances, use FHA Refinance Net 
Tangible Benefit Worksheet, Doc. #9348. 
 
STATE-REQUIRED NET TANGIBLE BENEFIT FORMS 
FHA Refinance Net Tangible Benefit Worksheet, Doc. #9348 may not be used in lieu of any state-
required net tangible benefit forms. When a state requires a net tangible benefit form, the appropriate 
form must be completed.  
 
POWER OF ATTORNEY 
•  All signatures on the power of attorney must be notarized, and the power of attorney must be 
reviewed by a Flagstar underwriter. All signatures must match the signatures in the file 
•  Unless the POA is a military Durable POA, the POA must be specific to Flagstar Bank’s loan and 
indicate the property address 
•  POA is not allowed for single borrower transactions unless Flagstar Bank has borrower experience 
and the underwriter can compare signatures from previous transaction(s) 
 
 REFINANCE TRANSACTIONS 
STREAMLINE REFINANCES AND CASH-OUT REFINANCE LOANS 
•  Refinances must meet all FHA 4000.1 occupancy requirements; and 
•  Must meet the following seasoning requirements when the loan being paid off is a government 
loan (FHA, VA or USDA); and 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  15 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
•  The borrower made at least six consecutive monthly payments on the loan being refinanced, 
beginning with the date the payment was made for the first payment due date; and 
•  The first payment due date of the refinance loan occurs no earlier than 210 days after the first 
payment due date of the initial loan. 
 
SHORT PAYOFF ON A RATE AND TERM REFINANCE 
A specific written principal reduction (short payoff) agreement between the existing lender and borrower 
is required. The agreement must reference the borrower and the loan being paid off. 
 
SOCIAL SECURITY AND DISABILITY BENEFITS 
When the Notice of Award or equivalent document does not have a defined expiration, the Mortgagee 
must not inquire or request additional documentation for continuance of the nature of the disability or the 
medical conditions.  If any disability income from (Social Security Administration (SSA), Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA), or a private disability insurance provider) is due to expire within three years from the 
date of mortgage application, that income cannot be used as Effective Income.  Refer to HUD Single 
Family Handbook 4000.1 for complete details. 
 
TITLE 
The title commitment must be dated within 90 days of closing.  If greater than 90 days, a gap letter will be 
required, which will allow the title to be extended an additional 90 days  
 
ENERGY LOAN TAX ASSESSMENT PROGRAM (ELTAP) LIENS 
Not permitted 
 
MINERAL RIGHTS – EXCEPTIONS TO TITLE 
Exceptions to title for Mineral Rights are acceptable as long as the title company states in writing that 
there are no active mineral rights on the property at the time of loan closing 
 
DEED RESTRICTIONS 
•  In addition to any deed restriction that does not meet FHA’s requirements, deed restrictions with 
the following characteristics are ineligible: 
  Single-family use restrictions when the property is a two- to four-family property 
o
  Deed restriction creates or provides for a lien that would be prior to the lien of the home 
o
mortgage or provides for the elimination of the home mortgage lien 
•  The terms and provisions of the restrictive agreements or restrictive covenants must be 
commonly acceptable to the private institutional mortgage investors in the area where the 
mortgaged premises are located 
•  Title company must provide an endorsement to the title policy that affirmatively insures that no 
violation of any such restrictive agreement or restrictive covenant exists and that any future 
violation shall not result in forfeiture or reversion of title is required 
 
UNEXPIRED RIGHTS OF REDEMPTION 
•  All States Except Alabama: 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  16 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
  Unless the property is located in the State of Alabama, Flagstar will not approve and/or 
o
purchase any loan having an unexpired right of redemption unless the purchase 
agreement, title and appraisal all show the same seller who is the original mortgagor 
  Title may show lis pendens notices from the bank or mortgagee 
  Purchase contract may indicate a short sale 
•  Alabama Only: 
  Purchase agreement, title and appraisal will be in the name of the lender and not the 
o
original mortgagor. 
  Title commitment will show one or both of the following acceptable recorded deeds: 
o
  Foreclosure from John Doe (original mortgagor) to Anybank (foreclosing lender) 
followed by the date on the deed and the recording date 
  When the foreclosing lender deeds the property to HUD, Fannie Mae, Freddie 
Mac, VA or GNMA, there will be a special warranty deed from Anybank 
(foreclosing lender) to one of the GSEs listed above followed by the date on the 
deed and the recording date 
•  If the above referenced deeds are dated within the most recent 12 months, the title commitment 
must contain a specific exception for the unexpired right of redemption and affirmatively insure, 
without qualification, the mortgagee (Flagstar Bank) against all losses arising out of the exercise 
of any outstanding right of redemption 
 
UNDERWRITING TURN TIMES 
Current underwriting turn times are posted on Flagstar’s website. 
 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  17 of 17    11/18/2022 
Return to Top 
 
 

NEW PAGE