Advantage Bank Statements  
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE, FULLY AMORTIZING 1 
Property Type  Maximum LTV  Maximum Loan Amount   Minimum Credit Score 
90%2 (Purchase Only)  $1,000,000  720 
1-2 Units   85% (Purchase Only)  $2,000,000  680 
PUD 
80%  $2,000,000  660 
Condo 
  80%  $2,500,000  680 
80%  $3,000,000  700 
 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – CASH-OUT REFINANCE, FULLY AMORTIZING 1,3 
Property Type  Maximum LTV  Maximum Loan Amount   Minimum Credit Score 
80%  $1,500,000  700 
75%  $1,500,000  660 
80%  $2,000,000  720 
1-2 Units 
75%  $2,000,000  700 
PUD 
Condo  70%  $2,000,000  660 
 
75%  $2,500,000  720 
70%  $2,500,000  700 
70%  $3,000,000  720 
 
SECOND HOME – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE, FULLY AMORTIZING 1 
Property Type  Maximum LTV  Maximum Loan Amount   Minimum Credit Score 
85% (Purchase Only)  $1,000,000  680 
80%  $1,000,000  660 
1-Unit  85% (Purchase Only)  $1,500,000  720 
PUD 
75%  $1,500,000  660 
Condo 
  80%  $2,000,000  680 
80%  $2,500,000  700 
75%  $2,500,000  680 
 
SECOND HOME – CASH-OUT REFINANCE, FULLY AMORTIZING 1,3 
Maximum   Minimum 
Property Type  Maximum LTV 
Loan Amount   Credit Score 
75%  $1,500,000  680 
70%  $1,500,000  660 
1-Unit 
PUD  75%  $2,000,000  720 
Condo  70%  $2,000,000  680 
 
65%  $2,000,000  660 
70%  $2,500,000  720 
 
Footnotes: 
1.  LTV Restrictions: 
o  LTVs > 85% require 50% expense ratio on income calculation 
o  LTVs > 80% not allowed on Option 2 - Third Party Expense Ratio for income calculation 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
o  Condos – Max 85% LTV 
o  No subordinate financing allowed 
o  Declining markets as defined by the appraisal - reduce max LTV by 5%, not to exceed 80% LTV 
o  Non-permanent Resident Alien: 
  Max 80% LTV 
  Primary Residence only 
  Purchase and Rate/Term Refinance only 
2.  Minimum loan amount is $200,000.  First Time Home Buyer not allowed. 
3.  Cash Out Refinances:  
o  Refer to Cash Out Refinance section for cash out limits 
o  Requires 12 months ownership for max LTVs on cash out.  For properties owned 6-12 months, max 75% LTV for primary residence and max 
70% LTV for second homes. 
 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE, INTEREST ONLY 5 
Property Type  Maximum LTV  Maximum Loan Amount   Minimum Credit Score 
1-2 Units  85%4 (Purchase Only)  $2,000,000  700 
PUD 
80%  $3,000,000  700 
Condo 
 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – CASH-OUT REFINANCE, INTEREST ONLY 5,6 
Property Type  Maximum LTV  Maximum Loan Amount   Minimum Credit Score 
80%  $1,500,000  700 
80%  $2,000,000  720 
1-2 Units 
75%  $2,000,000  700 
PUD 
Condo  75%  $2,500,000  720 
 
70%  $2,500,000  700 
70%  $3,000,000  720 
 
SECOND HOME – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE, INTEREST ONLY 5 
Property Type  Maximum LTV  Maximum Loan Amount   Minimum Credit Score 
1-Unit  85%4 (Purchase Only)  $1,000,000  700 
PUD 
85%4 (Purchase Only)  $1,500,000  720 
Condo 
  80%  $2,500,000  700 
 
SECOND HOME – CASH-OUT REFINANCE, INTEREST ONLY 5,6 
Maximum   Minimum 
Property Type  Maximum LTV 
Loan Amount   Credit Score 
75%  $1,500,000  700 
1-Unit 
PUD  75%  $2,000,000  720 
Condo  70%  $2,000,000  700 
 
70%  $2,500,000  720 
Footnotes: 
4.  40 yr. term not permitted 
5.    LTV Restrictions: 
o  Rate/Term Refinance max 80% LTV 
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
o  LTVs > 80% not allowed on Option 2 - Third Party Expense Ratio for income calculation 
o  No subordinate financing allowed 
o  Declining markets as defined by the appraisal - reduce max LTV by 5%, not to exceed 80% LTV 
o  Non-permanent Resident Alien: 
  Max 80% LTV 
  Primary Residence only 
  Purchase and Rate/Term Refinance only 
6.  Cash Out Refinances:  
o  Refer to Cash Out Refinance section for cash out limits 
o  Requires 12 months ownership for max LTVs on cash out.  For properties owned 6-12 months, max 75% LTV for primary residence and max 
70% LTV for second homes. 
 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
The Advantage Bank Statement program offers an alternative income documentation solution for self-
employed borrowers. The bank statement program is designed for active, productive businesses. Borrowers 
with passive income such as rental properties, or borrowers whose business is asset speculation, e.g. fix and 
flip investors, day traders, etc. are not eligible. 
 
While the Advantage Bank Statement product is considered a Non-QM product and not subject to QM testing, 
loans are still subject to Federal, State and Municipal predatory testing. As such, these products may not be 
eligible in some states. 
 
Refer to the Bank Statements as Qualifying Income section for all requirements including minimum 
documentation required for submission to Underwriting.   
 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
Loan  Interest Only  ARM 
Product Name  
Term  Term  Disclosure 
Advantage Bank Statements 30-Year Fixed  30 years  n/a 
Advantage Bank Statements 30-Year Fixed (10yr IO)  30 years  10 years  n/a 
Advantage Bank Statements 40-Year Fixed (10yr IO)  40 years  10 years 
Advantage Bank Statements 7/6 SOFR ARM  30 years  n/a  Doc. #3384  
Advantage Bank Statements 7/6 SOFR ARM (10yr IO)  30 years  10 years  Doc. #3395 
Advantage Bank Statements 7/6 SOFR ARM 40-Year (10yr IO)  40 years  10 years  Doc. #3396 
 
PREPAYMENT PENALTY 
Not allowed. 
 
HIGHER PRICED MORTGAGE LOAN (HPML) 
Higher Priced Mortgage Loans are allowed. High Cost (Section 32) loans are not eligible. Refer to Compliance 
procedures, Doc #4801 for HPML requirements. 
 
LOAN REGISTRATION  
In order to view the Bank Statement product as an eligible product, on the loan application screen the user 
must select “12 MONTHS BANK STATEMENTS” as the Doc Type. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
LOAN AMOUNTS 
Minimum: $150,000 
Maximum: Refer to Eligibility Grids above 
 
CASH OUT REFINANCE 
The maximum cash back to borrower includes non-mortgage debt to be paid off.   
Maximum cash out is determined by LTV: 
LTV  Max Cash Out 
>= 65% to 80%  $500,000 
< 65%  $750,000 
 
Refer to Eligibility Grids for additional requirements at higher LTVs. 
 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE 
Not required. 
 
MINIMUM CREDIT SCORE 
Refer to Eligibility Grids above.  
 
QUALIFYING RATE AND PAYMENT 
30 YEAR FIXED 
Note rate amortized over 30 years 
 
30 YEAR FIXED INTEREST ONLY 
Note rate amortized over 20 years 
 
40 YEAR FIXED INTEREST ONLY 
Note rate amortized over 30 years 
 
7/6 ARM AMORTIZING – 30 YEARS 
Greater of Note Rate or fully-indexed rate amortized over 30 years 
 
7/6 ARM INTEREST ONLY – 30 YEARS 
Greater of Note Rate or fully-indexed rate amortized over 20 years 
 
7/6 ARM AMORTIZING ONLY – 40 YEARS 
Greater of Note Rate or fully-indexed rate amortized over 30 years 
 
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
QUALIFYING RATIOS 
LTV  Max DTI 
> 85%  45% 
<= 85%  50% 
 
For qualifying debt to income ratios > 45%, borrower must meet residual income requirements per the 
Residual Income Worksheet, Doc #3279. 
 
PAYMENT SHOCK 
First time home buyers are limited to a maximum 300% payment shock.  
 
Payment shock is calculated by dividing new housing payment (PITIA) by the current housing payment.  
Example:  
Proposed Housing Payment (PITIA): $ 2,100  
Current Rent Payment: $ 1,200  
$2,100 divided by $1,200 = 175% payment shock 
 
An alternative calculation, the new payment may not exceed the existing payment multiplied by three.  
Example: 
Current rent payment of $1,200 x 3 = $3,600  
New PITIA may not exceed $3,600 
 
RESERVES 
Occupancy  Loan Amount  Required Verified PITIA Reserves  7,8 
≤$1,500,000   6 months 
Primary Residence  
$1,500,001 - $3,000,000   12 months 
Second Home  All loan amounts  12 months 
7.  Borrowers with multiple (more than 1) financed properties require the greater of nine (9) months or stated higher reserve amount above plus an 
additional two (2) months of reserves for each additional financed property. The two (2) months additional reserves are based on the PITI plus HOA 
fees of the other financed properties. For primary residence transactions, this requirement can be waived for borrowers who have a minimum of 12 
months’ reserves on the primary residence. 
8.  For Interest Only loans, reserves are calculated on the initial Interest Only payment. 
 
INTERESTED PARTY CONTRIBUTIONS 9 
Occupancy  LTV  IPC Allowance 
≤ 80%  6% 
All Occupancy Types 
> 80%  3% 
9.  HOA dues are not allowed to be included in an interested party contribution. 
 
MINIMUM BORROWER CONTRIBUTION 
Gifts allowed on a primary residence, purchase transaction only.   
LTV  Minimum Borrower Contribution 
> 80%  Borrower must have 10% of their own funds documented but not required for use 
<= 80%  Borrower must have 5% of their own funds documented but not required to use 
 
V. Product Guidelines  5 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  U.S. Citizens 
•  Permanent Resident Aliens  
•  Non-permanent Resident Aliens  
  Refer to Eligibility Grids above for all restrictions. 
o
  DACA borrowers are not eligible 
o
  In addition to the requirements for Non-permanent Resident Aliens in the Flagstar Non-Agency 
o
Underwriting guidelines, the following applies: 
  Visa types of H2, H3 or L-1A are not eligible 
  Additional documentation required: 
•  Copies of the borrower’s passport is required 
•  Copies of an acceptable Visa required.  An EAD must be obtained if the visa is 
not sponsored by the borrower’s current employer. 
•  If an EAD will expire within 3 months of the application, the borrower must show 
evidence they have applied for an extension or provide a letter from the employer 
indicating they will continue to sponsor their employment. 
 
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  1 to 2-unit properties 
•  Warrantable low, mid and high-rise condos.  Condo conversions are not allowed. 
•  Planned unit development (PUD) 
•  Properties with up to 10 acres (total property acreage must be included on appraisal)  
•  Rural Properties: 
  Max 75% LTV for Primary Residence; max 70% LTV for Second Homes.  
o
  Max 10 acres 
o
  Must be primarily for residential use 
o
  Property must not be agricultural or provide a source of income to the borrower 
o
  Lot size and acreage must be typical for the area and similar to the surrounding properties 
o
  Present use as per the appraisal must be the “highest and best use” for the property 
o
•  Properties located in a Declining Market as defined by the appraisal must reduce the max LTV by 5%, 
not to exceed 80% LTV. 
 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
In addition to the ineligible property types listed in the Non-Agency Underwriting Guidelines, the following 
property types are ineligible: 
•  3-4 unit properties 
•  Co-ops 
•  Non-warrantable condos 
•  Modular Homes 
•  Properties with square footage < 600 feet 
•  Properties purchased through Auctions 
•  Properties located in lava zones (all zones) 
V. Product Guidelines  6 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
•  Properties with mandatory country club memberships 
•  Properties with multiple detached single-family homes on a single lot (does not apply to Accessory 
Dwelling Units) 
•  Commercially zoned unless a warrantable condominium 
•  Community Land Trusts 
•  Properties without full kitchens (i.e. kitchenettes) 
•  Group homes 
•  Properties near commercial influence.  Examples include: 
  Environmental Hazards with potential impact to health and safety 
o
  Industrial factory 
o
  Located in an area not conforming to the neighborhood (i.e. few residential properties in density) 
o
  Power plants 
o
 
NUMBER OF FINANCED PROPERTIES 
A borrower may not have more than ten (10) residential properties financed including their primary residence. 
Joint ownership in residential real estate is considered the same as total ownership and is subject to the same 
restriction. Refer to the reserves section for minimum required reserves for borrower’s who own more than the 
subject property. 
 
APPRAISAL REQUIREMENTS 
All appraisals must be reviewed by the appraisal department. 
Loan Amount  Appraisal Requirement 
Up to $1,500,000  One Full Appraisal + Secondary Valuation 
> $1,500,000  Two Full Appraisals 
 
All loan amounts up to $1,500,000 require a secondary valuation product. The secondary valuation must be 
within -10% tolerance of appraised value.  For LTVs > 85%, the secondary valuation must be within - 5% of 
appraised value.   
 
Acceptable products are: 
•  Consolidated Analytics CCA Product. Refer to Doc. #4910 for instructions on how to order the product. 
•  Field Review 
•  Second full appraisal 
 
Please note:  For all transactions, the borrower may not waive the three business day timing requirement for 
the receipt of a copy of the appraisal.    
 
UNDERWRITING 
All guidelines not addressed in this product description must meet the parameters documented in our Non-
Agency Underwriting Guidelines. 
•  Manually underwritten. Not eligible for AUS submission. 
•  Fourth Party Originations are not eligible. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  7 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
ASSETS 
All asset guidelines not addressed in this section must meet the parameters documented in our Non-Agency 
Underwriting Guidelines 
 
BUSINESS ASSETS 
Funds from a business account may be used for down payment, closing costs and reserves if: 
•  There is 100% ownership of the business across borrowers on the loan; and 
•  The company’s CPA provides a statement indicating withdrawal of the funds will not negatively 
impact the business.  
 
CRYPTO CURRENCY 
Not eligible for funds to close or reserves. 
 
GIFT FUNDS INCLUDING GIFT OF EQUITY 
Gift funds can be used for down payment or to pay closing costs only. The following parameters apply: 
•  Purchase transactions only  
•  Primary residence only 
•  Signed gift letter is provided, indicating: 
  Donor’s relationship to Borrower, (donor must be related to the Borrower); 
o
  Donor’s address, and phone number, and; 
o
  Dollar amount of gift; and 
o
  Certification it is an outright gift with no repayment required. 
o
•  Evidence of the donor’s ability to provide funds, with 60 days’ sourcing and seasoning; 
•  Evidence of transfer of funds such as a cancelled check or evidence of wire transfer from donor to 
Borrower. Documentation must also include a bank statement or other evidence from the depository 
institution that receives the funds; 
•  Refer to Minimum Borrower Contribution for additional requirements 
 
Gifts of equity may be given provided all of the following are met: 
•  Primary residence only 
•  Max LTV of 75% 
•  Subject property mortgage rating from the seller is required to confirm not a bail out 
•  Signed gift letter is provided; and 
•  Gift of equity is listed on the HUD-1 or Closing Disclosure. 
 
Gift funds not permitted: 
•  From any donor other than a relative or Family Member of the Borrower; 
•  From any donor that is a party to the transaction, (other than a gift of equity from the seller); or 
•  From any donor that is a real estate builder, developer or in the business of owning, financing, or 
selling real estate. 
 
LARGE DEPOSITS (ONLY APPLIES TO ASSETS FOR CLOSING AND/OR RESERVES) 
Any large deposit not consistent with the Borrower’s employment, earnings or savings profile must be fully 
explained and sourced with acceptable documentation in order to be eligible for down payment, closing 
V. Product Guidelines  8 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
costs, earnest money deposit and reserves. A large deposit is generally considered an amount exceeding 
50% of the total qualifying income.  
 
A signed letter of explanation from the Borrower is required in these instances and must sufficiently 
explain and source the funds. All funds used for these purposes must be from an acceptable source and 
clearly not the result of undisclosed Borrower funds, debt, or an incentive from an interested party such as 
a seller, real estate agent or developer. 
 
RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS 
When used as reserves, Retirement Accounts, including personal IRA and SEP-IRA accounts that are 
owned by the Borrower, 401(k), KEOGH, 403(b) and other IRS qualified retirement plans: 
•  Up to 60% of the vested amount, less any outstanding loans secured by account funds, may be 
counted toward Reserves, and 
•  Not more than 50% of the Borrower’s total minimum required Reserves may be from these sources 
OR; 
•  If the borrower is of retirement age, 100% of funds may be used for reserves if the account is not 
also an income source. 
 
CREDIT REQUIREMENTS 
All credit guidelines not addressed in this product description must meet the parameters documented in our 
Non-Agency Underwriting Guidelines 
 
MINIMUM TRADELINE REQUIREMENTS 
Each individual borrower contributing income for qualifying purposes must meet the following: 
•  Minimum of three tradelines required 
•  At least one tradeline has been open/active in the last 12 months 
•  At least one tradeline has a 24 month history (open or closed) 
•  A VOR may only be counted as a tradeline if 12 months proof of payment is provided via cancelled 
checks or bank debits.  Carbon copies or handwritten receipts are not eligible. 
•  Authorized user accounts are not counted towards the tradeline requirements 
 
ALTERNATIVE CREDIT HISTORY 
Not eligible. 
 
MORTGAGE/RENT HISTORY REQUIREMENTS: 
•  The borrowers previous housing payment history is required.  The file must contain verification of 
the borrower’s 12 month payment history on the primary residence and any mortgage loans on a 
second home or investment property.   
•  For all occupancy types, no mortgage payment, including subordinate liens may be (to date of loan 
application): 0x30 in the last 12 months. 
•  Mortgage payment history - the file must contain a 12 month payment history (or since origination, 
whichever is less) for all mortgages including subordinate liens.  Mortgage history must be verified 
from the credit report and other acceptable documentation, such as a Verification of Mortgage 
(VOM) completed by a financial institution. 
V. Product Guidelines  9 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
•  For a refinance of the subject property or for a departing residence, must document the property 
taxes and HOA dues on that property are current at time of application.   
•  Rental payment history – if the borrower previously paid rent for their residence, then the borrowers 
rental housing payment history is required.  Payments must be documented via an institutional 
Verification of Rent (VOR), or cancelled checks/bank records.  Carbon copies or handwritten rent 
receipts are not acceptable.  A VOR from an individual or a private party landlord does not meet the 
requirement of verifying the borrower’s prior housing payment history.   
•  Borrowers who have lived in a rent-free situation are ineligible.  If a borrower has lived in a 
temporarily rent-free situation for a time period of 3 months or less, and the prior 12 months can be 
documented, this is acceptable.  (example:  borrower sold residence then lived with family rent free 
until a new home was available). 
 
DEROGATORY CREDIT: 
HOUSING EVENTS 
Housing Events require a seasoning period of 4 years at time of closing.  
•  Housing Event is defined as a Foreclosure, Short Sale, Deed in Lieu, Loan Modification, Notice 
of Default, Forbearance or 120+ Days Delinquent; 
•  Defaulted first and second on same property is considered one event; 
•  Housing Events that occur on the same property are considered a Single Housing Event. For 
example, Borrower’s primary residence is 120+ Days DQ, then goes into Foreclosure; 
•  Events include all occupancy types – Primary, Second Home & Investment Properties 
•  Seasoning look back is from the date of discharge or property resolution (completion date), as 
of the note date; 
•  COVID forbearance, or repayment plans, for any property/mortgage owned by the borrower, 
must be completed with all related financial obligations satisfactorily met AND: 
  For a purchase or rate/term refinance, at least three (3) consecutive timely payments 
made as of the application date of the new loan. 
  For a cash out refinance, at least six (6) consecutive timely payments made as of the 
application date of the new loan. 
•  Modification look back commences at inception; 
•  Bankruptcy (“BK”) is not considered a housing event and is permitted in combination with a 
housing event; 
•  Foreclosures included in bankruptcy permitted based on BK discharge date if the borrower has 
vacated the property. 
 
BANKRUPTCIES 
Bankruptcies require a 4 year seasoning period: 
•  Chapter 7 bankruptcies – Duration since bankruptcy is calculated from the discharged or 
completed date to the loan application date; 
•  Chapter 13 bankruptcies – Duration since bankruptcy is calculated from the discharged, or 
dismissed or completed date to the loan application date; and 
•  Multiple BK filings per person are not eligible (an amended filing is not considered multiple 
filings). 
 
V. Product Guidelines  10 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
COLLECTIONS, CHARGE-OFFS, JUDGMENTS & LIENS 
All delinquent credit that will impact title – including delinquent taxes, judgments, charge-off accounts, 
tax liens and mechanics liens must be paid off prior to or at closing.  Title must insure the lien position 
without exception.  Any item secured against the subject must be paid in full. 
 
However, collection accounts, charged-off accounts and judgments that do not impact title are not 
required to be paid off if the sum total of all derogatory accounts is $5,000 or less. When total exceeds 
$5,000, all must be paid in their entirety and all past due accounts brought current.  Medical collections 
are allowed to remain outstanding as long as the balance is less than $10,000 in aggregate. 
 
DELINQUENT CREDIT BELONGING TO EX-SPOUSE 
Delinquent credit which belongs to an ex-spouse may be excluded from the credit evaluation when all 
of the following apply: 
•  File contains a copy of the divorce decree or separation agreement which shows the derogatory 
accounts belong solely to the ex-spouse; 
•  Late payments that have occurred after the date of the divorce or separation; and 
•  If debt in question is a mortgage, evidence of title transfer prior to any delinquent debt must be 
provided and evidence of “buyout” as part of court proceedings. 
 
DELINQUENT CREDIT BELONGING TO CO-SIGNER 
A Co-signer is considered a Borrower on the loan, and therefore delinquent credit that belongs to a 
cosigner must be considered when evaluating the loan. 
 
WRITTEN EXPLANATIONS 
All significant derogatory events including previous housing events and bankruptcies require a  written 
explanation from the borrower(s).   
 
BANK STATEMENTS AS QUALIFYING INCOME 
The bank statement program is designed for active, productive businesses. Borrowers with passive income 
such as rental properties, or borrowers whose business is asset speculation, e.g. fix and flip investors, day 
traders, etc. are not eligible.  
 
DOCUMENT REQUIREMENTS 
•  12 months personal or business bank statements  
  Bank statements should be most recent available at time of application but never more than 
o
45 days prior to application.  
  Transaction history printouts are generally not acceptable. 
o
  Multiple bank accounts may be used. More than 3 separate business accounts must use 
o
personal bank statements.  
•  Business Narrative 
  The self-employed borrower must provide a business narrative which includes detail related 
o
to the size/scope and operating profile of the business, including the following: 
  Description of Business/Business Profile 
  Locations 
  Number of Employees/Contractors 
V. Product Guidelines  11 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
  Description of Goods/Materials  
  Materials/Trucks/Equipment 
  Commercial or Retail client base 
  The Business Narrative form is required in order to submit the loan.  
o
•  An internet search of the business is required to support the business narrative 
  Underwriter certification (or notation on the 1008) if there are no returns when attempting an 
o
internet search 
 
MINIMUM BANK STATEMENT DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS FOR  SUBMISSION TO 
UNDERWRITING 
•  Fully completed Business Narrative  
•  12 months most recent bank statements 
 
DOCUMENTATION ANALYSIS 
•  Unusually large deposits in bank accounts being used to qualify may require a letter of explanation 
or evidence they are business related 
•  Declining Income may require an LOE 
•  NSFs should be covered with deposits shortly after they are incurred.  
•  The Business Income Worksheet will be used to calculate income. 
 
BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS: 
•  Validation of a minimum of 2 years existence and ownership of the business from one of the 
following: Business License, Letter from Tax Professional, Secretary of State Filing or equivalent.  
•  Ownership percentage must not be less than 25% and be documented via CPA letter, Operating 
Agreement, or equivalent 
•  Any change of ownership percentage must be seasoned at least 12 months.  Borrower must have 2 
year history of at least 25% ownership. 
•  For a primary residence purchase, relocation in excess of 200 miles is not permitted unless 
business is predominately run out of the home.   
•  Borrower paid by multiple 1099s or single payor 1099 with variable income are considered Self 
Employed and are qualified using bank statements.  
  Provide 1099’s plus 12 months bank statements to support receipt of the income.  
o
  Provide a business narrative and appropriate expense factor will be applied. 
o
  1099 transcripts are required. 
o
 
PERSONAL BANK STATEMENTS 
•  Two months of business bank statements must be provided to validate borrower utilizes separate 
bank account 
  Analysis of the business bank statements cash flow is not performed 
o
  Co-mingling of personal and business receipts and expenses is not permitted in personal 
o
bank accounts.  If the borrower does not maintain a separate business bank account, the 
personal bank statements will be considered business bank statements for qualifying loan 
purposes and the loan must be submitted/qualified as a business bank statement loan and 
an appropriate expense factor applied.   
V. Product Guidelines  12 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
•  Any deposits into a personal account deemed to derive from a source other than the business 
(rents, SSI, joint account holder wage income, IRS refunds) must be excluded from the analysis 
•  Transfers from other bank accounts into the business bank accounts will require conclusive 
evidence that the source of transfer is business related income 
•  If personal bank statements provided reflect payments being made on obligations not listed on the 
credit report, a thorough analysis must be performed and an LOE may be required 
 
Qualifying Income: 
Qualifying deposits divided by 12 months (Personal bank statement average (total eligible deposits / 12 
months) 
 
BUSINESS BANK STATEMENTS 
•  Transfers from other bank accounts into the business bank accounts will require conclusive 
evidence that the source of transfer is business related income 
•  Any deposits deemed to derive from a source other than business including SBA loans or PPP 
funds must be excluded from the analysis. Refer to the Bank Statement Income Worksheet for a full 
list of ineligible deposits.   
•  Multiple business accounts may be used up to a maximum of three (3) business accounts.  If 
borrower has more than three (3) business accounts, must use personal bank statement option. 
•  Customary business debt such as auto or a business credit card may be excluded from the DTI 
when evidenced of 12 months payments made from the business statements. Does not apply to if 
the  Expense Ratio used to qualify is less than 50%. Mortgage debt may not be excluded from DTI 
when paid by the business.  
 
Qualification (must use one of the following two options): 
•  The expense ratio should be reasonable for the profession - for all qualifying methods. 
Example: A home-based sole practitioner consultant can be expected to have a lower expense 
ratio, while a retail business that has a full staff of employees, fleet of vehicles, and relies heavily on 
inventory to generate income will have a higher expense ratio. To the extent that Flagstar has 
evidence or other reason to believe that the reasonable expense ratio for a business is higher than 
the Fixed Expense Ratio methodology, Flagstar may determine, in its sole discretion, to require the 
borrower to follow Option 2.  
•  Flagstar reserves the right to request additional information.  The expense ratio should be 
consistent with the revenue and expenses in the business bank statements. 
  Example: A business that consistently shows withdrawals on the bank statements for 
o
employee wages or cost of goods sold used in the Fixed Expense Ratio, will be ineligible. 
  Businesses that have significant pass-through revenues, such as retail businesses that 
o
perform check cashing services or sell lottery tickets, or investment firms that receive 
outside investment capital, are ineligible. 
 
OPTION 1 – FIXED EXPENSE RATIO  
All businesses can qualify using a 50% expense ratio.  The Fixed Expense Ratio calculation has the 
following expense factor options: 
 
a)  50% Expense Factor will be utilized to calculate income with the following met: 
•  Any loan with an LTV > 85% will be required to use the 50% expense factor. 
•  Must verify borrower is minimum 25% owner of business. 
V. Product Guidelines  13 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
•  Decreasing or negative ending balances must be addressed. 
 
b)  20% Expense Factor eligible only if all of the following applies to the business: 
•  Max LTV 85%. 
•  Borrower must be sole owner and operator of the business (no partners, employees, etc.). 
•  Business must be a service business (no costs of goods, no heavy equipment, machinery, etc.). 
•  Business does not require office space that would incur rent. 
 
OPTION 2 – THIRD PARTY EXPENSE RATIO | 15% FLOOR  
A third party expense factor must be deemed reasonable for the business type. If deemed unreasonable, a 
minimum of 50% expense factor will be used. 
•  Max LTV 80% 
•  A Tax Professional is a Certified Public Accountant CPA, Tax Attorney, Enrolled Agent (EA), 
California Tax Educational Council Member (CTEC) or a Paid Tax Professional (PTIN). 
•  Program has a 15% floor on the expense ratio 
•  Documentation Required: 
  The Tax Professional must provide the following: 
o
  The Tax Professional must provide an expense statement specifying business 
expenses as a percentage of the gross revenue.   
•  The Tax Professional must certify that the Expense Ratio represents an 
accurate summary of the applicable cash expenses of the business. 
•  The letter from the Tax Professional must be on letterhead, originate from the 
tax professional’s office and be signed.  DocuSign is not allowed. 
•  The Tax Professional must verify the borrower’s ownership percentage  
  Documentation supporting the Tax Professional is licensed must be provided. 
o
  An attestation that the Tax Professional has filed the most recent business tax returns on 
o
behalf of the borrower is required. 
 
Qualifying Income: 
To determine net income, multiply eligible business deposits by the following: 100% minus the Expense 
Ratio as described above. 
 
**Note: Self-employed borrowers who file their own tax returns are not eligible** 
 
4506-C REQUIREMENTS 
For transactions solely using bank statements as income to qualify, the 4506-C is not required to be signed 
and should not be processed.  Processing a 4506-C on the self-employed borrower may render the file 
ineligible for the bank statement program. 
 
For transactions using supplemental income sources such as W-2 or 1099 income, a 4506-C is required.  The 
4506-C must be processed and the transcripts for the W-2 or 1099 income are required to be included in the 
loan file. 
 
SUPPLEMENT INCOME SOURCE REQUIREMENTS  
All income guidelines not addressed in this section must meet the parameters documented in our Non-Agency 
Underwriting Guidelines.  
V. Product Guidelines  14 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
 
JOINT ACCOUNTS  
A joint personal account with a non-borrowing spouse or domestic partner can be used for qualifying as 
follows: 
•  If not contributing income/deposits, it must be validated by a borrower affidavit 
•  If contributing income/deposits, source must be clearly identified (direct deposit, SSI, trust income) 
and amounts must be subtracted from the analysis 
•  Relationship letter must be present in file 
 
COMPONENT SOURCES OF INCOME 
A borrower who has a self-employed business and also receives income from other sources that do not 
require tax returns is eligible for the bank statement program. These income sources must be separately 
documented on the 1003 and must be separately supported by bank statement deposits. Refer to the Non-
Agency Guidelines for other income sources requirements if not addressed below.  Any income documented 
with tax returns is not eligible.  Submission of tax returns will deem the file ineligible. 
 
INELIGIBLE INCOME TYPES 
•  Rental income including income from commercial real estate 
•  Projected Income/Employment Contract 
•  Restricted Stock Units 
•  Boarder Income 
•  Capital Gains 
•  K-1 Income  
•  Farm Income 
•  Asset Depletion 
•  Foreign Income 
•  Employed by a family member 
 
SELF EMPLOYED/WAGE EARNER COMBINATION  
Joint borrowers with 1 wage earner and 1 self-employed business owner can verify income separately, 
with the self-employed borrower utilizing bank statements and the wage earner providing pay stubs/W-
2’s. The wage earner 4506-C should include W-2 transcripts only. Only one year of W-2’s is required. 
•  If the source of the co-borrower wage earner income is associated with the self-employed 
borrower’s business, the income is not eligible. 
 
GAPS IN EMPLOYMENT 
Borrower must explain, in writing, any job gaps that span one (1) month or more.   
For borrower re-entering the work force after an extended absence, borrower must be employed at 
current job for a minimum of 6 months.  A previous 2 year work history prior to the gap must be 
documented. 
 
401K/IRA RETIREMENT INCOME 
Distributions from a retirement account, such as a 401(k), IRA, SEP or Keogh retirement account can 
be used as qualifying income provided there is a three (3) year continuance.  Distributions cannot be 
set up post application date unless the borrower is required to start withdrawing based on age. 
V. Product Guidelines  15 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
 
Document regular and continued receipt of the income for, as verified by: 
•  Letters from the organizations providing the income; 
•  Copies of retirement award letters; 
•  IRS W-2 or 1099 forms; or 
•  Proof of current receipt. 
 
When retirement income is paid in the form of a distribution from a 401(k), IRA, or Keogh retirement 
account, determine whether the income is expected to continue for at least three years after the 
date of the mortgage application. In addition: 
•  The borrower must have unrestricted access without penalty to the accounts; and 
•  Retirement income received from an asset-based retirement account (i.e. 401k) requires 2 
months receipt of income. 
•  If the assets are in the form of stocks, bonds, or mutual funds, 70% of the value (remaining after 
any applicable costs for the subject transaction) must be used to determine the number of 
distributions remaining to account for the volatile nature of these assets. 
 
TRUST INCOME 
•  Income from trusts may be used if constant payments will continue for at least the first 3 or 5 
years of the mortgage term as evidenced by trust income documentation. 5 years required if 
income source is > 50% of loans total qualifying income. 
•  Trust Agreement required confirming amount, distribution frequency, and duration of payments. 
 
1099 INCOME  
1099’s are acceptable for independent contractors and must not be paying themselves from their own 
business or family business.  
•  Single payer 1099 with office or home-based position requiring no travel, no employees, no cost 
of goods, no vehicles or heavy equipment – Provide 2 years 1099s plus most recent 2 months 
proof of wage-based receipt of regular, equal income via bank statements, payroll registers or 
paystub equivalents. No expense factor will apply. 
•  Single payor 1099 with variable income must use the bank statement program and appropriate 
expense factor applied. 
•  Borrowers with multiple 1099s are considered as self-employed and must use bank statement 
underwriting. 
•  Must provide 1099 transcripts 
 
LIABILITIES 
All liability guidelines not addressed in this section must meet the parameters documented in our Non-Agency 
Underwriting Guidelines 
 
STUDENT LOANS 
If a monthly student loan payment is provided on the credit report, the lender may use that amount for 
qualifying purposes. If the credit report does not reflect the correct monthly payment, the lender may use 
the monthly payment that is on the student loan documentation (the most recent student loan statement) to 
qualify the borrower.  
 
V. Product Guidelines  16 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
If the credit report does not provide a monthly payment for the student loan, or if the credit report shows $0 
as the monthly payment, the lender must determine the qualifying monthly payment using one of the 
options below: 
•  If the borrower is on an income-driven payment plan, the lender may obtain student loan 
documentation to verify the actual monthly payment. The use of estimated income-based 
repayments is not allowed. If the payment is $0 the borrower must qualify using the guides listed 
below for deferred loan/loans in forbearance/income-driven payment of $0. 
•  For deferred loans, loans in forbearance, or income-driven payment of $0 the lender must calculate  
  a payment equal to 2% of the outstanding student loan balance, or  
o
  a fully amortizing payment using the documented loan repayment terms 
o
 
Student loans listed as delinquent must be brought current. If a student loan is charged off, the total will be 
included in the cumulative charge off balance in the last 24 months. If a student loan is placed for 
collection, get a copy of the repayment agreement, a copy of a canceled check and include the payment in 
the DTI. 
 
TRANSACTION TYPES 
PURCHASE TRANSACTIONS 
•  Flip transactions are not allowed. If the seller has been on title for 360 days or less, the following 
applies: 
  Resales within 181 days are not allowed. 
o
  Resales seasoned greater than 181 days up to 360 days allowed but may not have an 
o
increase in appreciation of more than 30%.   
  Seasoning is based on the date seller takes title to date sales contract executed. 
o
  Resales of properties owned greater than 360 days allowed with no additional restrictions.  
o
•  12 month chain of title is required. 
 
RATE/TERM REFINANCE 
•  Cash to borrower may not exceed the lesser of 2% or $2,000. 
•  Borrower must meet Continuity of Obligation guides. 
•  12 month chain of title is required. 
•  For properties owned less than 6 months at the time of the Note date, the LTV will be based on the 
lesser of the original purchase price or the current appraised value.  The prior settlement statement 
will be required for proof of purchase price. 
  In the case of an inherited property, the appraised value may be used to determine the LTV. 
o
•  Properties listed for sale in the last six (6) months are not eligible. The time frame is measured from 
the date the property was no longer listed or offered for sale to the application date of the current 
transaction. 
   
CASH OUT REFINANCE 
•  A minimum of six (6) months must have elapsed since the most recent mortgage transaction on the 
subject property (either the original purchase transaction or subsequent refinance). This timeframe 
is measured from the note date of the previous transaction to the note date of the current 
transaction. 
V. Product Guidelines  17 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
  For properties owned less than 12 months but greater than 6 months (seasoning is 
o
measured from purchase closing date to application date), the following LTV restrictions 
apply: 
  Primary residence may not exceed 75% 
  Second home may not exceed 70% 
•  12 month chain of title is required. 
•  Properties listed for sale in the last 12 months are not eligible for a cash out refinance transaction.  
The time frame is measured from the date the property was no longer listed or offered for sale to 
the application date of the current transaction. 
 
DELAYED FINANCING 
Borrowers who purchased the subject property within the past six months (measured from the date on 
which the property was purchased to the disbursement date of the new mortgage loan) are eligible for a 
cash-out refinance if all of the following requirements are met: 
•  The original purchase transaction was an arms-length transaction. 
•  The borrower(s) may have initially purchased the property as one of the following: 
  A natural person; an eligible inter vivos revocable trust, when the borrower is both the 
o
individual establishing the trust and the beneficiary of the trust; or 
  An eligible land trust when the borrower is the beneficiary of the land trust; or an LLC or 
o
partnership in which the borrower(s) have an individual or joint ownership of 100%. 
 
The new loan amount can be no more than the actual documented amount of the borrower's initial 
investment in purchasing the property plus the financing of closing costs, prepaid fees, and points on the 
new mortgage loan (subject to the maximum LTV ratios for the cash-out transaction based on the current 
appraised value). 
 
All other cash-out refinance eligibility requirements are met. Cash-out pricing is applicable.  Refer to the 
Non-Agency guides for all documentation requirements. 
 
CONTINUITY OF OBLIGATION 
For a refinance transaction (either rate and term/limited cash-out or cash-out), there must be a continuity of 
obligation if there is currently an outstanding lien that will be satisfied through the refinance transaction. 
 
An acceptable Continuity of Obligation exists when any of the following exist: 
•  There is at least one (1) Borrower obligated on the new loan who was also a Borrower obligated on 
the existing loan that is being refinanced; 
•  The Borrower has been on title and residing in the property for at least six (6) months and has 
either paid the mortgage for the last six (6) months or can demonstrate a relationship (parent, 
spouse, domestic partner, sibling, etc.) with the current obligor; 
•  The Borrower has recently inherited or was legally awarded the property (divorce, separation); or 
•  The existing loan being refinanced and the title have been held in the name of a natural person or a 
limited liability company as long as the Borrower was a member of the limited liability company prior 
to transfer. The loan must have been transferred out of Limited Liability Company prior to 
application. Transfer of ownership from a corporation to individual does not meet Continuity of 
Obligation. 
 
NON-ARM’S LENGTH TRANSACTION  
Non-arm’s length transactions involve a personal relationship or business relationship (outside of the 
subject transaction) between the Borrower and any interested party to the transaction. These transactions 
V. Product Guidelines  18 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
must be fully disclosed as such and the appraiser must be informed of the non-arm’s length transaction 
and address whether or not the market value has been affected. 
 
A "family member" is defined as the Borrower's spouse, child, dependent, domestic partner, fiancé, 
fiancée, or any other individual related to the borrower by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship. 
 
Non-arm’s length transactions are considered only under the following conditions: 
•  Relationships are clearly disclosed with initial submission either on the purchase contract or with a 
relationship letter; 
•  Primary residence only; 
•  Additional risk factors are not present (i.e., distress sale, selling assets for down payment, etc.); 
•  Loans made to principals or employees of the lender or service provider cannot provide services on 
their own transactions (closing agent, title agent, appraiser, etc.); and 
•  In purchase transactions where the lender is a corporation, partnership or any other business entity, 
the seller must ensure that the Borrower is not one of the owners of the business entity selling the 
subject property. 
•  Borrower must provide a copy of the cancelled earnest money check paid to the property seller (if 
applicable)   
•  Borrowers purchasing from their current landlord requires cancelled checks or bank debits to 
support rental history.  Carbon copies or handwritten receipts are not eligible. 
•  A borrower serving as realtor cannot buy own listing. 
 
Family transactions occur when a family member deeds the title to their home to another family member. 
The following apply to family transactions: 
•  Relationships are clearly disclosed with initial submission; 
•  Primary residence only; 
•  Purchase contract must be provided; 
•  A Gift of Equity letter is required to explain the relationship and reason for the gift; 
•  Appraiser must note this is a non-arm’s length transaction; 
•  Foreclosure bailouts are not allowed. Payoff statement and Verification of Mortgage (VOM) on 
subject required as verification; 
•  The HUD-1 must reflect all liens on title are paid and not all loan proceeds going to the family 
member. 
 
SUBORDINATE FINANCING 
Subordinate financing is not allowed. 
 
TEXAS REFINANCE LOANS 
All refinance loans in Texas will be evaluated against the criteria outlined in our Non-Agency Underwriting 
Guidelines, Texas Home Equity/50(a)(6) Right of Rescission section to determine whether or not they must 
be originated under the requirements of Section 50(a)(6) of the Texas Constitution.   
 
V. Product Guidelines  19 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
Available with the following geographic restrictions 
State  Restriction 
Puerto Rico  Not Eligible 
Virgin Islands  Not Eligible 
 
ADJUSTABLE RATE DETAILS 
Interest Rate Adjustment Caps  7/6: Initial: 5% up/down; Subsequent: 1% up/down; Lifetime: 5% up 
Margin  See Price Indication Sheet  
Index  30 Day SOFR (Secured Overnight Financing Rate) 
Interest Rate Floor  The interest rate floor is equal to the Margin 
7/6 ARM: The first change date is the 84th payment due date. There is a new 
Change Dates 
change date every 6 months thereafter. 
Conversion Option  None 
Assumption  Not allowed 
Negative Amortization  None 
 
POWER OF ATTORNEY 
In addition to the requirements listed in the Non-Agency Underwriting Guidelines for using a Power of Attorney, 
borrowers must provide a letter of explanation regarding the reason for using a Power of Attorney. 
 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Closing docs may be ordered through Flagstar’s TPO website. 
 
FIXED RATE LOANS – FULLY AMORTIZING 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multistate Fixed Rate Note, 3200-series 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
FIXED RATE LOANS – INTEREST ONLY 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Interest-Only Period Fixed Rate Note, 3200-series IO or equivalent 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
ADJUSTABLE RATE LOANS – FULLY AMORTIZING 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Fannie Mae/ Freddie Mac multistate Adjustable Rate Note, Form #3442 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multistate Adjustable Rate Rider, Form #3142 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
ADJUSTABLE RATE LOANS – INTEREST ONLY 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Multistate Interest-Only Period Fixed/Adjustable Rate Note, Form #3442 IO or equivalent 
•  Multistate Interest-Only Fixed/Adjustable Rate Rider, Form #3142 IO or equivalent 
V. Product Guidelines  20 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Advantage Bank Statements  
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
IF APPLICABLE 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multistate Condo Rider, Form #3140 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multistate PUD Rider, Form #3150 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multistate 1-4 Family Rider, Form #3170  
•  Fannie Mae-Freddie Mac multistate Second Home Rider, Form #3890 
 
 
V. Product Guidelines  21 of 21  Document #5435 
Return to Top      02/03/2023 
 

NEW PAGE