Flagstar Bank Tax Transcript Requirements 
TAX TRANSCRIPT REQUIREMENTS 
All Non-Delegated Correspondents and Brokers will be required to provide tax transcripts from a third-party 
vendor as follows: 
 
CONVENTIONAL 
A fully executed IRS Form 4506-C must be included in all loan files.  
 
Tax transcripts are required as follows: 
•  If required on a specific product or a concurrent Flagstar secondary lien product (e.g. Second 
Mortgages, Helocs) per the product description.  
•  A copy of tax transcripts confirming “No Transcripts Available” may be required when a copy of IRS 
Form 4868 (Application for Automatic Extension of Time to file U.S. Individual Income Tax Returns) 
is provided in lieu of the most recent tax year filing returns. (See Conventional Guides for applicable 
application and Note date requirements) 
 
NON-AGENCY 
A fully executed IRS Form 4506-C must be included in all loan files except the Advantage Bank Statement 
product. 
 
Tax transcripts are required when the following income types used for qualification (number of years of 
transcripts is based on the applicable number of years required and/or provided):  
•  Self-Employment  
•  Rental Income documented on Schedule E  
•  Employed by family  
•  When tax returns are utilized to determine qualifying income and/or in lieu of alternative 
documentation options when applicable  
•  Hand written income documentation. 
 
Note: For Advantage Bank Statement Product only, Doc 5435, full tax transcripts cannot be provided. See 
product for additional details when a W-2 or 1099 transcript may be required.  
 
STANDALONE HELOC 
Tax Transcript results are required for the applicable years when tax returns are used to document 
qualifying income. 
 
GOVERNMENT 
Unless the loan is a VA Interest Rate Reduction Refinance Loan (IRRRL) or FHA non-credit qualifying 
streamline refinance, results for one year are required, or the most recent two years if required per AUS 
finding.  In order to determine the percentage by which non-taxable income may be grossed up, 4506-C 
results are required for borrowers who receive non-taxable income.  
   
 
OVERLAYS  
 4506-C  
•  A fully executed IRS Form 4506-C must be included in all loan files.  
•  1040 transcripts are required for the following income types:  
  Self-employed  
o
  Rental income documented on Schedule E  
o
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  1 of 2  09/22/2022 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Flagstar Bank Tax Transcript Requirements 
  Employed by family  
o
  In lieu of alternative documentation options, when tax returns are utilized to determine 
o
qualifying income 
 
USDA 
Results for the most recent two years are required for all household members. 
 
VIRGIN ISLANDS 
For individuals residing and filing in the Virgin Islands, requests must be manually processed through 
underwriting when using Flagstar Bank Network and may result in additional time for receipt of results.   
 
Note: Borrower obtained tax-transcripts are not considered an eligible third-party source to validate the tax 
returns. 
 
Flagstar reserves the right to request tax transcripts beyond the instances listed above in the event there are 
additional loan level red flags.  
 
FLAGSTAR PREFERRED VENDOR 
Equifax is the preferred vendor for the Flagstar Bank Network (FSBN). While customers are not required to, 
they may establish access and utilize this service though theworknumber.com to obtain tax transcripts. 
 
For questions regarding new accounts for the Flagstar Bank Network, or contracting additional services, please 
contact Equifax via member.network@equifax.com. Please include your seller ID and copy your account 
executive on the email.  
 
EQUIFAX CUSTOMER SERVICE: 
Equifax Verification Support  
877-442-9963 
VerifierSolutionsSupport@Equifax.com 
 
 
 
   
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  2 of 2  09/22/2022 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE