Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
RESTRICTED-ELIGIBILITY PROGRAM 
Contact your account executive regarding participation in Flagstar Bank’s construction programs. Loans will 
close in Flagstar’s name and table-fund. 
 
Mortgage insurance providers may have additional restrictions not listed within this document. Please refer to 
each mortgage insurance company’s website for complete eligibility details.  
 
FIXED RATE CONFORMING 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – PURCHASE & RATE/TERM REFINANCE 
Maximum  Maximum  Minimum  Underwriting Engine & 
Property Type 
LTV  CLTV/HCLTV  Credit Score  Required Response 
1-Unit  
Warrantable Condo  97%   105%/97%1, 2 
NA 
PUD 
DU – Approve/Eligible 
2-Unit  85%  85% 
3 to 4-Unit  75%  70%  660 
 
FIXED RATE HIGH BALANCE  
PRIMARY RESIDENCE  - PURCHASE & RATE/TERM REFINANCE  
Maximum  Maximum  Minimum  Underwriting Engine & 
Property Type 
LTV  CLTV/HCLTV  Credit Score  Required Response 
1-Unit  
Warrantable Condo  95%  105%/95%1, 2 3 
NA 
PUD 
DU – Approve/Eligible 
2-Unit  85%  85% 
3 to 4-Unit  70%  70%  700 
1.  The LTV/CLTV is limited to 95% on rate/term refinances of High Balance and loans with a non-occupant borrower. 
2.  Traditional subordinate financing is limited to 97% CLTV. Maximum CLTV allowed up to 105% for purchase transactions when using an approved 
community second program. 
3.  Refinances with an LTV greater than 95% existing loan must be owned or securitized by Fannie Mae. 
 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
The HomeReady-HomeStyle product is offered by Fannie Mae to help meet the diverse needs of today’s 
buyers. It is designed for creditworthy, low to moderate income borrowers, with expanded eligibility in 
designated low-income communities. The Renovation program allows borrowers to combine the purchase or 
refinance of a home with the costs to renovate or extensively remodel the property. At closing all funds for 
renovation will be escrowed in an interest earning account. After all renovation work is complete, any 
remaining funds in the renovation escrow account will be used to pay down the principal balance of the 
mortgage. Soft costs such as architectural services, engineering and permit fees may be financed. Full builder 
third-party contracts only. 
 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
Product Name  Term 
HomeReady-HomeStyle 30-Year Fixed  30 years 
HomeReady-HomeStyle 20-Year Fixed  20 years 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
Product Name  Term 
HomeReady-HomeStyle 15-Year Fixed  15 years 
HomeReady-HomeStyle 10-Year Fixed  10 years 
HomeReady-HomeStyle High Balance 30-Year Fixed  30 years 
HomeReady-HomeStyle High Balance 20-Year Fixed  20 years 
HomeReady-HomeStyle High Balance 15-Year Fixed  15 years 
HomeReady-HomeStyle High Balance 10-Year Fixed  10 years 
 
LOAN REGISTRATION 
•  Select HomeReady for the product question: ‘Is an affordable housing loan requested?’ See the Income 
Limits section below for additional registration instructions. 
•  Select Yes for the product question: Is a Renovation Loan Requested? 
 
LOAN AMOUNTS 
Refer to the HomeStyle Renovation Worksheet, Fannie Mae Form #1035 to determine maximum loan amount 
and maximum funds for renovation.  
 
MAXIMUM 
The maximum conforming loan limits for 1 to 4-unit properties, including high balance loan limits. Refer to 
Fannie Mae High Balance, Doc. #5346 for a complete list of eligible high-cost areas. 
 
Borrower may not receive cash back at closing in any amount (Fannie Mae standard limited cash-out refinance 
of 2% or $2,000, whichever is less, is NOT PERMITTED for this product).  
 
DRAW FEES 
Refer to the Construction & Renovation Lending for fee requirements. 
 
Loans in the following states require additional title updates at the time of each draw. Obtain the fee for 
additional title updates from the title company and include them in application disclosures and any subsequent 
disclosures. If you are unable to ascertain the cost of the additional title updates use $175 per additional draw.  
If a borrower plans three draws you should be collecting $175 for the final title update plus an additional title 
update fee for two draws based on the title company price quote. 
•  Massachusetts 
•  Michigan 
•  Minnesota 
•  New Hampshire 
•  New Jersey 
•  New York 
•  Rhode Island 
•  Virginia 
•  West Virginia 
 
For properties located in Illinois, the following title companies need to be used: 
•  First American Title 
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
•  Fidelity National Title 
•  Chicago Title 
•  Attorneys Title Guaranty 
 
For a smoother draw process with your construction or renovation loans you may wish to use these companies 
in all eligible locations. 
 
Construction Survey will be needed if the footprint of the home is changed and / or there is an additional 
structure to the home that is being added (i.e. pool, deck, garage, out building, etc.). Refer to Construction & 
Renovation Surveys, Doc. #4211 for information about the construction survey fee that will be disclosed on the 
initial Loan Estimate. If the actual charge incurred by Flagstar is less than the amount collected, the difference 
will be refunded to the borrower within 30 days of conversion to the permanent phase. 
 
EXTENSIONS OF RENOVATION PERIOD 
Refer to the Construction & Renovation Lending for fee requirements. 
 
CONSTRUCTION GUIDES  
Executed borrower acknowledgement must be in the loan file.  The construction guide and supporting 
documentation can be found in the Seller’s Guide.  
 
Borrower and contractor must also be supplied with the appropriate State Statutory Form package and State 
Draw Requirement Letters. These can be found in the 3000 section of the Seller’s Guide. 
 
FILE SUBMISSION 
BUILDER/PROJECT PACKAGE 
Builder/project packages must be submitted to: 
Granite Loan Management, LLC 
10770 Briarwood Ave., Suite #280 
Centennial, CO 80112 
Phone number: (866) 380-9657 
Fax number: (800) 919-8912 
Email: projects@graniteriskmanagement.com 
 
CREDIT PACKAGE 
Credit packages must be submitted to Underwriting through paperless loan submission. 
 
LOANS WITH AN LTV, CLTV, OR HCLTV 95.01 – 97% 
All loans with an LTV, CLTV, or HCLTV between 95.01 – 97% must meet all of the following criteria: 
•  Purchase CLTV is restricted to 97% if subordinate lien is not an eligible community second loan. 
Eligible community second may have a CLTV up to 105% 
•  HCLTV is restricted to 97% 
•  Rate/term refinance CLTV is restricted to 97%. 
•  Subject loan must be a fixed-rate 
•  All borrowers must occupy the property, non-occupant co-borrowers are not eligible 
•  DU Approve/Eligible 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
•  Reserves per DU 
•  For limited cash-out refinances, the lender must document that the existing loan being refinanced is 
owned (or securitized) by Fannie Mae. Using the look up tool located at knowyouroptions.com, a 
screenshot of the findings must be uploaded into the loan file. 
 
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  All income-eligible occupant borrowers 
•  Non-occupant co-borrowers for loans with LTV, CLTV, or HCLTV less than or equal to 95% 
 
ELIGIBLE PROPERY TYPES 
•  1 to 4-unit properties 
•  Fannie Mae-warrantable condominiums 
•  Planned Unit Development (PUD) 
•  Modular homes (constructed in sections off-site, but when installed at the site, takes on the 
characteristics of a site-built home) 
 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  Manufactured homes 
•  Cooperative properties 
 
MINIMUM CREDIT SCORES 
All scores must meet the credit score validation requirements outlined in the Conventional Underwriting 
Guidelines. 
 
QUALIFYING RATE 
The note rate is the qualifying rate. 
 
QUALIFYING RATIOS 
•  Determined by Desktop Underwriter (DU) 
•  For DTIs above 45% and up to 50%, DU will no longer require certain additional compensating factors. 
If the DTI on a loan casefile exceeds the maximum allowable DTI of 50%, the loan casefile will receive 
an Ineligible recommendation.  See the Underwriting section below. 
 
APPRAISAL GUIDELINES 
All appraisals must be ordered through Flagstar Loantrac from an approved Appraisal Management Company 
even if the customer has AIR Compliant status.  Please refer to the Construction and Renovation Guide. 
 
The appraisal report must provide an “as completed” appraised value that estimates the value of the property 
after completion of the renovation work. 
 
RENOVATION-RELATED COSTS 
Renovation-related costs that may be considered as part of the total renovation costs include: 
•  Property inspection fees 
•  Costs and fees for the title update 
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
•  Architectural and engineering fees 
•  Independent consultant fees 
•  Costs for required permits 
•  Other documented charges, such as fees for energy reports, appraisals, review of renovation plans, 
and fees charged for processing renovation draws; and  
•  Up to six months payments (PITIA) if a principal residence property cannot be occupied during 
renovation. 
  The costs of the renovations will be based on the plans and specifications for the work and on 
o
the contractor’s bids for all of the work requested by the borrower. The renovation costs may 
include a contingency reserve, renovation-related costs, and an escrow for mortgage payments 
that come due during the renovation period, if the borrower is unable to occupy the property 
during the renovation. 
•  A contingency reserve equal to at least 10% of the cost of renovations is required on all transactions, 
regardless of property type, and must be included in the cost breakdown. 
 
The maximum cost for renovations are described in the following table: 
Transaction Type  The cost of renovations must not exceed 
75% of the lesser of  
Purchase  •  The sum of the purchase price of the property plus renovation costs, or 
•  The “as completed” appraised value of the property. 
Refinance  75% of the “as completed” appraised value of the property. 
 
ALLOWABLE IMPROVEMENTS 
There are no required improvements or restrictions on the types of renovations allowed, nor is there a 
minimum dollar amount for renovations.  
 
Generally, improvements should be permanently affixed to the real property (either dwelling or land), with 
the exception of certain appliances installed with kitchen and utility room remodels. The borrower may use 
HomeStyle Renovation to purchase appliances as part of an overall remodeling project that includes 
substantial changes or upgrades to the rooms in which the appliances are placed.  
 
HomeStyle Renovation may be used to complete the final work on a newly built home when the home is at 
least 90% complete. The remaining improvements must be related to completing non-structural items the 
original builder was unable to finish. Such work may include installation of buyer-selected items such as 
flooring, cabinets, kitchen appliances, fixtures, and trim.  
 
HomeStyle Renovation may be used to construct various outdoor buildings and structures when allowed by 
local zoning regulations. These buildings or structures must be in compliance with any applicable building 
codes for the local area. Examples of acceptable structures include, but are not limited to, accessory units, 
garages, recreation rooms, and swimming pools.  
 
HomeStyle Renovation may not be used for complete tear-down and reconstruction of the dwelling. 
 
UNDERWRITING 
All loans must meet the parameters as set out in Flagstar Bank’s Residential Underwriting Guidelines. 
V. Product Guidelines  5 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
•  For purchase transactions at least one borrower must complete the Framework Homeownership 
Education course. Please see the Homeownership Education section below.  Homeownership 
Education is not required for rate/term refinance transactions. 
•  Loans must be submitted to DU and receive an Approve/Eligible response. 
•  All scores must meet the credit score validation requirements outlined in the Conventional Underwriting 
Guidelines.  Manual underwriting, thin file, or non-traditional credit profiles are not eligible. 
•  Minimum borrower contribution requirements for purchase loans: 
Minimum Borrower Contribution from Borrower Personal Funds 
HomeReady with  HomeReady with 
Standard HomeReady  Standard HomeReady 
Property   any grant funds  any grant funds 
LTV/CLTV/HCLTV  LTV/CLTV/HCLTV  
Type  LTV/CLTV/HCLTV  LTV/CLTV/HCLTV 
<=80%  >80% 
<=80%  >80% 
1-Unit  None  None 
2 to 4-Units  None  3%  None  5% 
    
INCOME AND INCOME LIMITS 
In determining whether a mortgage is eligible under the borrower income limits, the lender must count the 
income from all of the borrowers who will be listed on the mortgage note, to the extent that the income is 
considered in evaluating creditworthiness for the mortgage loan. 
•  80% of AMI as confirmed by DU 
•  In order to obtain the proper income limit an 11 digit Federal Information Processing Standard 
(FIPS) code must be determined. The FIPS is compromised of the state code, county code, and 
census tract. Once the FIPS is determined the income limits can be confirmed. 
  For pre-registration FIPS determination go to: 
o
  The HomeReady page on the Fannie Mae website 
  Select the Income Eligibility Lookup Tool under the Income Eligibility section 
•  Loans registered in Loantrac with a standardized address, Loantrac will display the FIPS number, 
the corresponding Area Median Income, and the corresponding income percentage limits. 
  If the FIPS and income limits are not displaying in the Affordable Housing screen, verify the 
o
property address and select standardized when prompted. 
•  When DU is able to standardize the address, a message will be issued specifying the census tract 
used to determine the income limit to be applied to the loan. 
•  FIPS census tract must be compared to appraisal. 
•  In the event the address cannot be standardized: 
  Determine the census tract via FFIEC link above  
o
  Document file with screenshot 
o
  Verify census tract with appraisal 
o
•  In the event a census tract number must be entered prior to the submission of the loan to 
underwriting, send an email underwritingsupport@flagstar.com with the following: 
  Census Tract Entry in the subject line 
o
  Seller ID# 
o
  Loan Number 
o
  Borrower Name 
o
V. Product Guidelines  6 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
  State Code, County Code, and Census Tract for the subject property 
o
  Underwriting Support enters Census Tract without a period (e.g. 2140.00 = 214000) 
  Underwriting Support ensures loan limits are displayed in the Affordable Housing 
screen prior to closing ticket 
•  Non-borrower household income is not required to be included for income limitation purposes 
•  Income other than the following listed below to be documented per standard Fannie Mae guidelines 
and/or DU 
  Boarder Income: 
o
  From a related or non-related party may be included for 1-unit properties as 
qualifying income up to an amount of 30% of the total qualifying income if the relative 
or non-relative has lived with (and paid rent to) the borrower for the last 12 months 
  The boarder must provide appropriate documentation to demonstrate a history of 
shared residency (such as a copy of a driver’s license, bill, or bank statement that 
shows the boarder’s address as being the same as the borrower’s address) 
  Document the payment of rent for borrower for; 
•  The last 12 months (through cancelled check, etc.) 
•  At least 9 months of the most recent 12 months provided the rental income is 
averaged over a 12-month period.  
  Rental Income from a 1-unit property with an accessory unit can be considered in qualifying 
o
the borrower; documentations and calculation in accordance with existing rental income 
guidelines 
  Income from a non-borrower household occupant is permitted. This income is not 
o
considered qualifying income and is not included in the DTI calculation. Non-borrower 
household income is entered in the Affordable Housing Selection of Loantrac 
  Non-borrower household income must be documented in accordance with standard 
guidelines based on income type 
  There must be a signed statement of the intent for non-borrower to reside with the 
borrower for a minimum of 12 months (or continue to reside with the borrower for 
rate/term refinance transactions.) See Fannie Mae 1019 HomeReady Non-Borrower 
Income Worksheet 
  The non-borrower’s income must be at least 30% of the total monthly qualifying 
income being used by the borrower 
  If income of more than one non-borrower is used, together they must be at least 30% 
of the total monthly qualifying income being used by the borrower. All contributors 
must provide income documentation as indicated above and execute Fannie Mae 
1019 HomeReady Non-Borrower Income Worksheet. 
  Boarder Income and non-borrower household income from the same person cannot be 
o
used. 
 
ASSETS 
•  Document reserves/asset requirements per standard Fannie Mae guidelines and/or DU  
•  Source of funds: 
  Borrower must contribute to the transaction from his or her own funds (if required) the 
o
minimum amount listed in the Underwriting section towards down payment, closing costs, 
and/or prepaid expenses. Other funds required for the transaction may be obtained from any 
combination of the following sources: 
V. Product Guidelines  7 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
  Gifts per Flagstar Conventional Underwriting Guidelines 
  Eligible grants, see Flagstar Gift/Grant Programs, Doc. #5935. 
  Community Seconds, see Flagstar Community Seconds Programs, Doc. #5932 
  Net proceeds from a loan against the cash value or from the surrender of a life 
insurance policy 
  Cash-on-hand may be an acceptable source of funds for down payment, closing 
costs, and prepaids in the following circumstances: 
•  Not used towards reserve requirements 
•  The following must be verified and documented: 
  The borrower customarily uses cash for expenses and that its usage 
o
and reasonableness, as well as the amount of funds saved is 
consistent with the borrower’s previous payment practices 
  The lender must verify that funds for the down payment and closing 
o
costs exist in a financial institution account or an acceptable escrow 
account. Funds must be on deposit at the time of application, or no 
less than 30 days prior to closing 
  Borrower to provide written statement that discloses the source of 
o
funds and states that the funds have not been borrowed 
  The borrower’s credit report and other verifications should indicate 
o
limited or no use of credit and limited or no depository relationship 
between the borrower and a financial institution 
•  Data must be entered correctly prior to submitting loan to DU: 
  You must enter the amount of cash on hand as Cash on Hand in the 
o
Assets section  of the online loan application 
•  DU will use the Cash on Hand amount to calculate the available funds to 
close. However, cash-on-hand funds will not be used to calculate reserves. 
As an example, if a borrower needs $2,000 to close and the amount of cash-
on-hand is $3,000, DU would count the cash-on-hand as sufficient funds to 
close; however, DU would not apply the remaining $1,000 toward reserves 
•  DU will return a message specific to the use of cash-on-hand 
 
INTERESTED PARTY CONTRIBUTIONS 
Interested party contributions include funds contributed by the property seller (directly or indirectly), builder, 
real estate agent/broker, or any other party with an interest in the real estate transaction. The mortgage lender 
may also be considered an interested party if it has an ownership relationship with the property seller or one of 
the other interested parties such as the builder or real estate broker/agent. 
•  Interested party contributions may be used exclusively to cover closing costs and prepaid expenses 
that exceed the borrower’s minimum contribution requirement 
INTERESTED PARTY CONTRIBUTION LIMITS 
CLTV  Up to 75%  75.01-90%  90.01-97% 
Primary Residences  Maximum 9%  Maximum 6%  Maximum 3% 
 
HOMEOWNERSHIP EDUCATION 
Refer to Conventional Underwriting Guidelines for requirements. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  8 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
PROJECT REVIEW AND APPROVAL 
•  Review and approval is required when the project exceeds $40,000.  
  A streamlined builder review is allowed for projects up to $40,000 
o
  A full builder review is required when the project exceeds $40,000 
o
 
SUBORDINATE FINANCING 
Refer to the Subordinate Financing section of the Conventional Underwriting Guidelines for details. The use of 
financing obtained from the property seller is not allowed. 
 
Eligible Community Seconds subsidized subordinate financing (up to 105% CLTV). Community Seconds may 
be eligible from a state, local or municipal authority or agency, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation, a tax-exempt 
religious organization or the borrower’s employer. Flagstar Bank must review all Community Second programs 
for eligibility. An official written description of the program (from the agency providing the funds), the loan 
documents used in connection with the financing (i.e. the Note, Mortgage/Deed of Trust, etc.), and any other 
written descriptive material must be submitted with the loan file. Subordinate financing program review 
generally requires three to five business days for approval. 
 
TEMPORARY BUYDOWNS 
Not eligible. 
 
TEXAS REFINANCE LOANS 
All refinance loans in Texas will be evaluated against the criteria outlined in our Conventional Underwriting 
Guidelines, Texas Refinances section to determine if the loan must be originated under the requirements of 
Section 50(a)(6) of the Texas Constitution. Refer to Texas Homestead 50(a)(6) Refinance - Correspondent, 
Doc. #5906, or Texas Homestead 50(a)(6) Refinance - Broker, Doc. #5907, for eligibility, 
documentation/disclosure, and title/closing requirements.   
 
SPECIAL FEATURE CODES 
This loan program requires that certain special feature codes be attached to each loan file by the underwriter. 
•  All HomeReady: SFC 900 
•  HomeStyle Renovation mortgage: SFC 215 
•  HomeReady High Balance: SFC 808 
•  Community Second (if applicable): SFC 118 
•  Other SFC as applicable 
 
PROPERTY VALUATION 
PURCHASE 
Loan amount is based on LTV derived from the lesser of: 
•  The as-is purchase price, renovation costs, contingency costs (if financed), eligible soft costs, 
interest reserve 
•  The as-completed value of the home 
 
V. Product Guidelines  9 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
RATE/TERM REFINANCE 
LTV is subject to appraised value. Loan amount not to exceed 100% of costs (total of liens on property, 
plus costs of improvements and closing costs).  Existing subordinate financing may be included in the new 
loan amount if the funds were used to acquire the property.  Cash-out is not eligible. 
 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE 
Mortgage insurance providers may have additional restrictions not listed within this document.  Due to rapid 
changes within the industry, please refer to each mortgage insurance company's website for complete details.   
 
Reduced MI coverage is not eligible. 
 
PURCHASE 
Mortgage insurance requirements are based on the LTV calculated using the after-improved value of the 
property or the cost base whichever is less. 
 
REFINANCE 
Divide the new loan amount by the after-improved value amount. If the resulting LTV is over 80.0%, 
mortgage insurance is required. 
 
COMMUNITY SECONDS 
All mortgages with a Community Second require 35% MI coverage. 
 
Loans above 80% LTV require mortgage insurance coverage according to the following guidelines: 
LTV  30-Year Fixed  10, 15 and 20-Year Fixed 
95.01 – 97% 
25% 
90.01 – 95%  25% 
85.01 – 90%  12% 
80.01 – 85%  12%  6% 
 
NEW YORK PROPERTIES 
See Conventional Underwriting Guidelines. 
 
For Single Financed Mortgage Insurance (SFMI) and Lender Paid Mortgage Insurance (LPMI) eligibility see 
Single Financed Mortgage Insurance – Lender Paid Mortgage Insurance, Doc. #5010. 
FLOOD INSURANCE 
A flood policy is required for any loan in a flood zone. 
•  The full policy must be issued prior to building vertically 
•  This may take up to 30 days for the agent to provide 
•  No exceptions will be issued. 
 
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
Contact your Account Executive regarding participation in Flagstar Bank’s construction programs. 
State  Restriction 
New York  Refer to New York Properties section for calculation requirements 
V. Product Guidelines  10 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Fannie Mae HomeReady-HomeStyle 
Puerto Rico  Ineligible 
US Virgin Islands  Not eligible 
 
PREPAYMENT PENALTY 
There is no prepayment penalty. 
 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Closing documentation for all Fannie Mae HomeStyle Renovation loans must be ordered through Flagstar’s 
Closing Services by submitting a Closing Services Request in Loantrac. Please see Flagstar Closing Services 
User Guide, Doc. #2206, for more information or contact the Closing Department via email at 
closings@flagstar.com or via phone at (866) 945-9872. 
•  Maximum draw request to contractor at closing is capped at 10% of the total renovation budget. No 
further draws can occur after closing until closing package has been received and post-closed by 
Flagstar Bank (usually 10 business days). 
•  Loans close in Flagstar’s name with Flagstar funds. Disclosure Statements must be generated from 
Loantrac. 
 
ALL LOANS 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
 
IF APPLICABLE 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Condo Rider, Form# 3140 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state PUD Rider, Form# 3150 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state 1-4 Family Rider, Form# 3170 (for 2 to 4-unit primary 
residences and all investment property mortgages) 
 
V. Product Guidelines  11 of 11  Document #5726 
Return to Top    12/30/2022 

NEW PAGE