Home Equity Line of Credit 
 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE 1,3 – PURCHASE 2 & CASH-OUT REFINANCE 
Property  Maximum  Maximum  Minimum  Total 
Type  LTV/CLTV  Line Amount  Credit Score  Debt Ratio 
1 to 4-Unit  
Warrantable Condo  89.99%  $500,000  680   45% 
PUD 
 
SECOND HOME 1,3 – PURCHASE 2 & CASH-OUT REFINANCE 
Property  Maximum  Maximum  Minimum  Total 
Type  LTV/CLTV  Line Amount  Credit Score  Debt Ratio 
1-Unit 
Warrantable Condo  80%   $500,000  700   45% 
PUD 
1. Properties located in the state of Texas are not eligible. 
2. Purchase-money loans are not eligible as standalone transactions; must close concurrently with a new Flagstar first mortgage. 
3. When used concurrently with a Flagstar first mortgage, if the first mortgage has a higher credit score requirement, lower LTV/CLTV requirement or lower DTI 
limit,  the more restrictive guideline(s) must be met. 
 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
Revolving line of credit with a 10-year draw period followed by a 20-year repayment period; full term is 30 
years. Monthly payments require either interest-only or principal and interest calculated on the outstanding 
balance and based on the product selected by the customer prior to closing. HELOCs will be table-funded and 
will close in the name of Flagstar Bank. Must not be used as a bridge loan. 
 
EXHIBITS & SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS 
•  Exhibit A – Standalone HELOC Valuation Decision Matrix 
•  Exhibit B – Allowable Fee Tables 
•  HELOC Amortization Schedule (requires Microsoft Excel 2013 or later) for payment scenarios 
•  TPO Standalone HELOC – Title Order and Fees User Guide 
•  TPO Standalone HELOC – Consolidated Analytics Property Valuation User Guide 
•  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
Product Name  Term  Lien Position  Description 
HELOC: P&I Pymt (2nd-Concurrent) 
Must close concurrently with a new Flagstar 
30 years  Second lien 
first mortgage 
HELOC: I-O Pymt (2nd-Concurrent) 
HELOC: P&I Pymt (2nd-Standalone)  For use behind an existing first lien; not 
30 years  Second lien  eligible for concurrent closing behind another 
HELOC: I-O Pymt (2nd-Standalone)  lender’s first mortgage 
HELOC: P&I Pymt (1st-Standalone)  For use on a property with no existing first 
30 years  First lien  lien or where the existing first lien will be 
HELOC: I-O Pymt (1st-Standalone)  refinanced into a HELOC also in first lien 
Use HELOC Amortization Schedule for payment scenarios. 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Home Equity Line of Credit 
 
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  Borrowers must be the same for the first mortgage loan and HELOC (concurrent HELOCs only) 
•  U.S. citizens 
•  Permanent resident aliens 
•  Non-permanent resident aliens 
•  Non-occupant co-borrowers 
•  Revocable/”living” trusts are acceptable provided it is established by, and the primary beneficiary is, an 
individual; for concurrent HELOCs, loans closing in a trust must follow the same trust requirement as 
the first mortgage 
INELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  Land trusts are not eligible, including Illinois land trusts 
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  1 and 4-unit properties (second homes must be 1-unit) 
•  Warrantable condominiums 
•  Planned unit developments (PUDs) 
•  Modular homes 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  Manufactured/mobile homes (single- or double-wide) 
•  Cooperative properties 
•  Vacant land 
•  Properties currently listed for sale 
•  Properties under construction or renovation at time of loan closing 
•  Properties titled as Life Estates are not eligible 
ELIGIBLE TRANSACTION TYPES 
•  Purchase 
  When used as part of a concurrent transaction to pay off an interim construction lien for a new 
o
property that has never been occupied, the transaction will be treated as a purchase 
  No rescission period is required; however, the borrower must execute a Right to Cancel 
form specific to HELOC purchase transactions (the right to cancel applies only to any 
undrawn portion of the line of credit; the initial disbursement used to payoff the interim 
construction financing is not subject to rescission) 
  No additional funds can be disbursed to the borrower with the initial draw; access to any 
remaining undrawn HELOC funds will be available only after closing and after the loan 
has been setup on the MSP servicing system; it may take up to three to four business 
days for the loan be setup on the servicing system 
•  Cash-out refinance 
  Subject to standard rescission guidelines applicable to refinance transactions 
o
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Home Equity Line of Credit 
INELIGIBLE TRANSACTION TYPES 
•  Rate/term refinance 
•  New York CEMA transactions 
INELIGIBLE FIRST LIEN TYPES 
CONCURRENT HELOCS 
•  FHA, VA, or USDA mortgages 
•  Construction or renovation loans 
STANDALONE HELOCS 
•  Land contracts or contracts for deed 
•  Reverse mortgages 
•  Negative amortization loans 
•  Home equity lines of credit or other future advance liens 
 
MINIMUM LINE AMOUNT 
•  $50,000 is the minimum line amount; the minimum initial draw requirement is the greater of $50,000 or 
50% of the full line amount 
 
FEES 
Customers may not charge any origination or third-party fees other than bona fide third-party fees listed below. 
Charges for credit report and third-party processing should be applied consistently on all loans made by the 
originator. Originators cannot retain any portion of bona fide third-party charges. 
Customers who have fee templates setup in the TPO website that pre-populate amounts for various 
fees must ensure that only the fees shown on Exhibit B are assessed on HELOC transactions. Closers 
must also validate that only Exhibit B fees are included when preparing closing documents. 
CLOSING FEES 
Refer to Exhibit B – Allowable Fee Tables for a list of permissible fees that may be assessed on HELOCs 
 
OTHER HELOC FEES 
ANNUAL FEE  
$75 charged to the line each year of the draw period; waived the first year 
 
EARLY CLOSURE FEE 
None 
INTEREST RATES/PRICING 
HELOC rates product are posted to the price indication sheets. Lines of credit must be locked by calling the 
Lock Desk at (866) 945-9872, option 1 and follow the prompts. The lock period will be 15 days, and the 
HELOC must be in Final Approval Clear to Close status.  
 
All HELOC loans will be priced at par (100.00).  Margin is effective as of the application date. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Home Equity Line of Credit 
INITIAL DISCLOSURES 
HELOCs are exempt from the TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosures (TRID) rule. Thus, Loan Estimates and 
Closing Disclosures are not provided for HELOC loans. A TILA disclosure is required, but it is not the same as 
the TIL disclosure provided for pre-TRID loans. Instead, the documents listed below will be included in the 
initial disclosure package for the HELOC loan obtained from the Disclosures screen on the TPO website. 
These disclosures must be provided to applicants within three days of the Broker/Correspondent customer’s 
application date. 
•  Important Terms of Your Home Equity Line of Credit, Doc. #3263 (the TILA disclosure for HELOCs) 
•  Federally-mandated CFPB booklet, What you should know about home equity lines of credit 
•  Other federal disclosures required: 
  List of Homeownership Counseling Organizations 
o
  Credit Score Disclosure 
o
Refer to Flood Insurance – Broker & Correspondent, Doc. #4603 for flood requirements. 
QUALIFYING RATE/PAYMENT 
The Qualifying Rate for all HELOCs is the fully indexed rate (index + margin) plus 1.00%. 
 
The Qualifying Payment for all HELOCs is a 20-year fully amortizing payment calculated at the Qualifying Rate. 
 
Use the HELOC Amortization Schedule tool to determine the qualifying rate/payment for the line of credit and 
to run payment scenarios using various initial draw amounts as well as subsequent draw and repayment 
amounts. Important Note: Users must have Microsoft Excel 2013 or later installed in order for the tool to 
calculate properly. 
 
INTEREST-ONLY HELOC PAYMENT CALCULATION (DURING DRAW PERIOD) 
Principal Balance x Interest Rate x (30 ÷ 365) 
 
PRINCIPAL & INTEREST HELOC PAYMENT CALCULATION (APPLIES THROUGHOUT TERM) 
(Principal Balance ÷ Remaining Term) + (Principal Balance x Interest Rate x (30 ÷ 365)) 
 
TOTAL DEBT RATIO 
The maximum debt-to-income (DTI) ratio is 45% (this is true even for concurrent transactions where DU or LP 
approved a higher ratio amount for the first mortgage). However, for concurrent transactions, it should be noted 
that some first mortgage products (e.g., jumbo) may have a lower DTI requirement that must be met. 
 
APPRAISAL / COLLATERAL EVALUATIONS 
All appraisals will be reviewed by the Appraisal Review Department. 
 
CONCURRENT HELOCS 
A full appraisal appropriate to the property type must be obtained. The appraisal from the first mortgage 
can be used. However, any reduced appraisal options offered by the first mortgage AUS findings, including 
a property inspection waiver (PIW), are not eligible. A full traditional first mortgage appraisal fee must be 
disclosed as part of the first mortgage disclosures. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Home Equity Line of Credit 
STANDALONE HELOCS 
Refer to Exhibit A – Standalone HELOC Valuation Decision Matrix to determine the valuation type required 
for a standalone HELOC.  
 
UNDERWRITING 
•  Concurrent HELOCs: Underwritten to the standards of the first mortgage product, except that the credit 
score, DTI ratio and appraisal requirements must meet the guidelines set out in this product description. 
•  Standalone HELOCs: Underwritten to the standards set out in this product description and Flagstar 
Bank’s Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines. 
•  Refer to the Standalone Home Equity Line of Credit Submission Review Checklist, Doc. #3234. 
•  Delegated underwriting is not permitted for HELOCs nor for any first mortgage loan originated for or 
intended to be sold to Flagstar as part of a concurrently closing transaction. For concurrent transactions, 
both the first mortgage and HELOC must be underwritten together by a Flagstar underwriter. 
•  Credit documents must be uploaded into the Documents screen of the TPO website for all HELOCs. 
•  For concurrent HELOCs, both the first and second lien loans must be linked together in the TPO website 
using the Linked Loan functionality; both loans should be submitted to Underwriting at the same time. 
•  Lines of credit are underwritten using the line amount requested, not the potential amount for which an 
applicant may qualify. 
•  Lines of credit may not be used to pay off a land contract unless it is recorded. 
CREDIT 
•  Concurrent HELOCs:  
  Credit report issued for the first mortgage must be reissued through the TPO website for the 
o
HELOC. 
  The credit standards of the first mortgage product will be used for the HELOC as long as the 
o
minimum credit score requirement is met (credit score requirement of either the first mortgage 
product or the HELOC, whichever is higher). 
  An AUS response of Approve (from Desktop Underwriter) or Accept (from Loan Product 
o
Advisor) for the first mortgage will be deemed as evidence of acceptable credit and no 
further manual review of the applicants’ credit profile will need to occur other than to confirm 
that the decision credit scores of each borrower are at or above the minimum credit score 
requirement of either the first mortgage product or the HELOC, whichever is higher. 
  When a first mortgage must be manually underwritten – as is the case with many jumbo 
o
loans, for example – then the credit standards of the first mortgage product will apply also to 
the HELOC with the exception of the minimum credit score requirement. As long as the 
underwriter has confirmed the borrower meets the credit requirements of the first mortgage, 
that will be deemed as evidence of acceptable credit and no further manual review of the 
applicants’ credit profile will need to occur other than to confirm that the decision credit 
scores of each borrower are at or above the minimum credit score requirement of either the 
first mortgage product or the HELOC, whichever is higher. 
•  Standalone HELOCs:  
  Refer to Flagstar Bank’s current Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines. 
o
  Customer must submit a tri-merged credit report for all standalone HELOC transactions. 
o
 
V. Product Guidelines  5 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Home Equity Line of Credit 
EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME 
•  Concurrent HELOCs:  
  The employment and income requirements and documentation standards of the first 
o
mortgage product will be used for the HELOC; this applies to transactions where the first 
mortgage is underwritten using an automated underwriting system (AUS) (e.g., 
Fannie/Freddie loans) as well as first mortgages that are manually underwritten (e.g., jumbo 
loans). 
  4506-C tax transcripts: 
o
  When tax returns are used to document the qualifying income, the more restrictive tax 
transcript requirements apply: 
•  The number of years required on the concurrent first mortgage, or 
•  The most recent (1) year tax transcript unless the following apply: 
  If transcripts are not required on the first mortgage, transcripts are also 
o
not required if the borrower is an existing Flagstar customer with one of 
the following: 
  Transcripts were previously obtained/provided to Flagstar for most 
recent year used for qualification; or 
  There is no significant increase (defined as 10%) to the income 
source based on the last available transcript for the borrower; or 
  Borrower has a satisfactory payment history of at least 12 months 
with Flagstar 
•  Standalone HELOCs:  
  Refer to Flagstar Bank’s current Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines. 
o
 
ASSETS 
•  Concurrent HELOCs:  
  The asset requirements and documentation standards of the first mortgage product will be 
o
used for the HELOC; this applies to transactions where the first mortgage is underwritten 
using an automated underwriting system (AUS) (e.g., Fannie/Freddie loans) as well as first 
mortgages that are manually underwritten (e.g., jumbo loans). 
•  Standalone HELOCs:  
  Refer to Flagstar Bank’s current Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines. 
o
 
INSURANCE COVERAGE 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE 
Mortgage insurance is not required for HELOCs 
 
TITLE INSURANCE 
•  Concurrent HELOCs:  
  Not required; title commitment from the first mortgage will be used for the line of credit 
o
•  Standalone HELOCs:  
  All states except Alaska, Hawaii and South Dakota: 
o
  A Property Report must be obtained from title vendor; the Broker/Correspondent must 
order the Property Report from title vendor, and it must be uploaded to the Documents 
screen on the TPO website as a prior to close condition identified as “Consumer Title” 
  Refer to TPO Standalone HELOC – Title Order and Fees User Guide 
V. Product Guidelines  6 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Home Equity Line of Credit 
  Alaska, Hawaii and South Dakota: 
o
  Title insurance is required in these states and must be ordered from title vendor 
  Refer to TPO Standalone HELOC – Title Order and Fees User Guide 
 
HAZARD INSURANCE 
The amount of hazard insurance coverage must include the full amount of the line of credit and any other 
mortgage liens secured by the property. 
 
Refer to Hazard Insurance Requirements, Doc. #4602 for hazard insurance guidelines 
 
FLOOD CERTIFICATE/FLOOD INSURANCE 
Refer to Flood Insurance – Broker & Correspondent, Doc. #4603 for flood insurance requirements. 
 
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
Available with the following geographic restrictions. States not listed are available without restrictions. 
State  Restriction 
Puerto Rico  Not eligible 
Texas  Not eligible  
US Virgin Islands  Not eligible 
 
VARIABLE RATE DETAILS 
Interest Rate 
None other than Interest Rate Floor & Ceiling Rate; no periodic rate caps 
Adjustment Caps 
Margin  See Price Indication Sheet 
Index  The Wall Street Journal Prime Rate 
Interest Rate Floor  1.99% 
Ceiling Rate  21.00% 
The rate will adjust on the first calendar day following any event impacting the Margin or 
Change Dates 
following the publication of any change to the Index 
Conversion Option  None 
Assumption  Not assumable 
Negative Amortization  None 
 
REQUESTING CLOSING SERVICES 
Customers must request closing services through the TPO website for all HELOCs. All HELOCs will be table-
funded and will close in the name of Flagstar Bank. Substantial differences exist in the closing process 
between concurrent and standalone HELOCs. See below for a description of the process for each. 
 
CONCURRENT HELOCS 
Customers must request closing services through the TPO website for all HELOCs. Concurrent HELOCs 
must close with the same settlement agent, and at the same time, as the first mortgage. 
 
STANDALONE HELOCS 
All standalone HELOCs must close through a pre-approved Standalone Settlement Agent available in the 
TPO website. Standalone HELOCs must NOT close using a traditional settlement agent. Refer to Exhibit B. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  7 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Home Equity Line of Credit 
STEP 1 
Prior to requesting closing services through the TPO website, customers will first need to request 
closing through the appropriate title vendor website (the same site used to order the property report). 
Please refer to the TPO Standalone HELOC – Title Order and Fees User Guide, for information about 
requesting closings for standalone HELOC transactions. The title vendor will engage a notary or 
attorney, as appropriate, based on the state where the property is located. Once scheduled, they will 
send a confirmation back to the customer. 
 
STEP 2  
On the TPO website, request closing services from Flagstar using the confirmed information received 
from the title vendor. Flagstar will contact the standalone settlement agent/attorney to receive the 
recording charges and will prepare the closing documents. Flagstar will send the closing documents to 
the standalone settlement agent. The settlement agent will conduct the closing with the borrower, will 
disburse funds after rescission, and will record the security instrument and any riders. 
 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Closing documents must be ordered through the Request Closing Docs link available on the TPO website. 
HELOCs will be table-funded and will close in the name of Flagstar Bank. 
 
All title holders must sign the mortgage even if they are not on the loan. 
 
ALL HELOCS 
•  Flagstar HELOC Line Agreement, DocMagic document HELCASD22.CST 
•  State-specific future advance mortgage, open-end deed of trust, etc., as applicable 
 
ADDITIONAL DOCUMENT THAT MAY BE NEEDED IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES 
•  Condominium Rider – HELOC, DocMagic document USHERDCN.HLC 
•  Planned Unit Development Rider – HELOC, DocMagic document USHERDPU.HLC 
•  1-4 Family Rider – HELOC, DocMagic document USHERD14.HLC (for 2-4 unit transactions) 
•  Second Home Rider – HELOC, DocMagic document USHERD2H.HLC 
•  Employee Rate Adjustment Amendment, DocMagic document ERAA.CST (all Flagstar Bank 
employee loans) 
 
FIRST PAYMENT DATE FOR HELOCS 
Payment for all HELOC loans will be due on the first of the month. HELOCs with disbursement dates on or 
before the 9th of the month (e.g., October 7th) will have a first payment date of the next month (November 
1). HELOCs with disbursement dates on or after the 10th of the month (e.g., October 11th) will have a first 
payment date of the first of the following month (December 1). 
 
The method for determining the first payment date for HELOC loans described above is different than the 
method used for first mortgage loans. Therefore, it is possible that the first payment date of the HELOC 
could be earlier than the first payment date of the first mortgage if the disbursement date is on or before the 
9th of the month. 
 
MORTGAGE ELECTRONIC REGISTRATION SYSTEM (MERS) 
HELOC loans do not require MERS registration or MIN numbers 
 
V. Product Guidelines  8 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Home Equity Line of Credit 
HIGH COST (SECTION 32) OR HIGHER PRICED (SECTION 35) MORTGAGE LOANS 
Flagstar Bank will not fund or purchase any High Cost (Section 32) mortgage loans under this program, or 
loans for which the points and/or fees exceed specific federal, state or local regulations. 
 
Higher Priced (Section 35/HPML) mortgage loan regulations do not apply to open-ended credit transactions. 
RIGHT OF RESCISSION 
Standard rescission guideline apply to refinance transactions. All primary residence borrowers and title holders 
must execute a Notice of Right to Cancel form at closing. Purchase borrowers (concurrent transactions only) 
will be required to execute a Notice of Right to Cancel for the non-purchase-money portion of the line of credit. 
 
ESCROWS 
CONCURRENT HELOCS 
An escrow account for taxes and insurance can be established with the first mortgage loan, but not with the 
home equity line of credit. However, regardless of whether an escrow account is established with the first 
mortgage loan, all housing expenses, including first and subordinate mortgage loan amounts, property 
taxes, homeowner’s insurance, flood insurance, association fees, etc., must be included in the debt ratio 
calculation. 
 
STANDALONE HELOCS 
An escrow account for taxes and insurance cannot be established as part of the home equity line of credit 
transaction. Also, all housing expenses, including first and subordinate mortgage loan amounts, property 
taxes, homeowner’s insurance, flood insurance, association fees, etc., must be included in the debt ratio 
calculation. 
 
ACCESSING HELOC FUNDS AFTER CLOSING 
Borrowers will receive a checkbook with which to access their line of credit approximately three weeks after 
closing. If they anticipate needing funds prior to that time, they should be encouraged to take those funds as a 
draw at closing. 
 
Refer to the Access to HELOC Funds FAQ document for other methods the borrower can use to access their 
HELOC funds. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  9 of 12  Document #5561 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
Exhibit A – Standalone Home Equity Valuation Decision Matrix 
 
This Decision Matrix is for Standalone HELOCs only. Concurrent HELOCs will use the appraisal from the first 
mortgage. 
 
           
      Use unexpired full appraisal from loan # __________________   
      Do not complete remainder of Decision Matrix. 
1.  Is the requested HELOC line amount > $250,000? 
      Yes  Full URAR appropriate to the property type is required. Order through Appraisal Management 
        screen in the TPO website. Enter “Home Equity” in Special Instructions. 
         
      No  Continue to #2   
           
2.  For a HELOC line amount <= $250,000, does the property have any of the following characteristics? 
      Recent remodel or extensive renovations?   
         
      Properties with excess acreage?  (15+ acres)   
         
      Unique design or amenities?  (Berm/dome/log home or atypical amenities such as private tennis court, 
           multiple outbuildings, etc.) 
         
      None of the above; Continue to #3   
         
    If any box other than “None of the above” is checked, order a full URAR appropriate to the property type 
    through Appraisal Management screen in the TPO website. Enter “Home Equity” in Special Instructions. 
           
3.  Order the following:  • Collateral evaluation1 (I-Eval) from Consolidated Analytics. 
 
 
 
Customers must use the Consolidated Analytics website to order collateral evaluations. Please refer to the TPO 
Standalone HELOC – Consolidated Analytics Property Valuation User Guide for information about how to place 
Consolidated Analytics valuation orders. 
1  Flagstar reserves the right to require a full appraisal at its sole discretion for any property when one of the other 
valuation options is deemed insufficient. 
V. Product Guidelines  10 of 11  Document #5561 (Exhibit A) 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
Exhibit B – Allowable Fee Tables 
Only the following fees may be charge on HELOC transactions: 
Concurrent  Standalone 
Fee Type  Description 
HELOCs  HELOCs 
Administrative Fee or 
Not assessed on HELOCs  N/A  N/A 
Commitment Fee 
Not charged on concurrent HELOCs because the 
appraisal from the first mortgage is used, but may be 
required on standalone HELOCs if a collateral  Amount varies; 
Appraisal Fee 1  N/A 
evaluation cannot be used. Paid for at the time the  actual cost  
order is placed. The settlement agent will not collect or 
reimburse funds for this service. 
If a collateral evaluation is permitted to be used for a 
$95 or $125; 
standalone HELOC in lieu of a URAR appraisal, the 
Appraisal - Collateral  depending on the 
collateral evaluation fee must be charged. Paid for at  N/A 
Evaluation Fee 1  valuation product 
the time the order is placed. The settlement agent will 
required 
not collect or reimburse funds for this service. 
Not permitted on concurrent HELOCs as the credit 
Amount varies; 
Credit Report Fee  report from first mortgage will be used; may only be  N/A 
actual cost 
charged on standalone HELOCs 
To determine if the property is in a Special Flood 
Flood Certification Fee  $7.50  $7.50 
Hazard Area 
1.00% of the full line 
Compensation paid by Flagstar to the 
HELOC Origination Fee  $250  amount (Min. $500; 
Broker/Correspondent for originating the HELOC 
Max. $1,250) 
May only be charged on standalone HELOCs for 
Amount varies; 
processing services performed by an independent third 
Processing Fee (third  actual cost, but 
party firm unaffiliated with the Flagstar TPO customer  N/A 
party)  must not exceed 
originating the HELOC; no portion of the fee can be 
$1,000 
payable to or retained by the Flagstar TPO customer. 
Amount varies;  Amount varies; 
The appropriate recording fee for the 
Recording Fee  obtain quote from  obtain quote from 
mortgage/security instrument must be charged 
settlement agent  title vendor 
State-specific or  Any fees or taxes charged by state or local  Amount varies;  Amount varies; 
Government-imposed  governments must be charged on the HELOC, as  obtain quote from  obtain quote from 
Fees and Taxes  applicable  settlement agent  title vendor 
Tax Service Fee  Not assessed on HELOCs  N/A  N/A  
All standalone 
Title work not required 
closings must be 
(1st mtg title will be used) 
coordinated with title 
 
Title Fees  Fees charged by the settlement agent  vendor; refer to TPO 
Settlement / Closing Fee: 
Standalone HELOC 
Amount varies; obtain quote 
– Title Order and 
from settlement agent 
Fees User Guide 
1. Standalone HELOCs: complete Exhibit A (Decision Matrix) prior to ordering any property valuation product or completing the Fee Summary page. 
 
Refer to TPO Standalone HELOC – Title Order and Fees User Guide for eligible title vendors and the 
associated title fees. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  11 of 11  Document #5561 (Exhibit B) 
Return to Top    01/19/2023 

NEW PAGE