Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
INTRODUCTION 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 
COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS/REGULATIONS 
These guidelines are intended to be consistent with all applicable legal and regulatory requirements 
regarding their subject matter.  
 
STANDALONE HOME EQUITY UNDERWRITING STANDARDS 
Prior to consummation, the underwriter must make a reasonable and good faith determination of the 
consumer’s ability to repay the loan. This determination must be based on a consideration of the 
consumer’s current or reasonably expected income, debt obligations, and assets (other than the value 
of the subject property) so that a monthly debt-to-income ratio or a monthly residual income amount, as 
appropriate, can be calculated.All applications require manual underwriting. No automated underwriting 
systems (AUS) will be used for standalone home equity transactions. 
 
UNDERWRITING CONSIDERATIONS OUTSIDE OF STANDARD GUIDELINES 
It is the responsibility of the underwriter to confirm that the credit underwriting information entered into 
the system is correct, that resources utilized are current and valid, and the decision is adequately 
supported as outlined within this document.  
 
Flagstar Bank reserves the right to reject any loan, regardless of the AUS response when 
applicable. Flagstar Bank will evaluate all aspects of the loan file, including but not limited to, 
LTV/CLTV, ratios, program parameters, reserves, credit, property type and value. Although no one area 
of a particular loan may be weak enough to merit a denial, a compilation of several weak areas with no 
or limited strength to compensate can be sufficient to deny. 
 
A loan file may be submitted to Flagstar Bank for an exception to the guidelines. The exception can be 
reviewed only by a designated employee of the bank on a case by case basis depending on the overall 
loan file. 
 
LOAN PURPOSE 
Standalone Home Equity Lines of Credit (HELOC) are secured loans allowing individuals to refinance 
or obtain equity from a residential property. 
 
SEGREGATION OF DUTIES 
The person who originates the loan application cannot be the person making the credit decision. 
Applications will be taken by authorized personnel or via online banking. All credit decisions will be 
made by the Underwriting Department. 
 
LOAN INTEGRITY 
It is the responsibility of Flagstar Bank to protect borrowers, our own company, investors, and insurers 
from becoming victim to mortgage fraud. Mortgage fraud is generally categorized as one of the 
following: fraud for housing, fraud for profit, or fraud for criminal enterprise. While the presence of one 
or more red flags in a file does not necessarily mean that there is fraudulent intent by parties involved in 
the transaction, red flags indicating a material misstatement, misrepresentation, or omission of 
information in relation to a mortgage loan, relied upon by Flagstar to meet the guidelines, must be 
addressed accordingly during the origination process. 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      5 of 55      01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTIONS AND RATE SHEETS 
Access the Product Guidelines page and Price Indicator Sheets on tpo.flagstar.com for the most 
current product descriptions and rates. 
 
LOAN REGISTRATION/LOCK 
Refer to Loan Registration and Locking a Loan, Doc. #4101 for registration and lock procedures. The 
addition or deletion of a borrower, a program change or a loan parameter change (loan amount, LTV, 
etc.) does not require an existing non-closed loan to be re-registered. 
 
ADVERSE ACTION 
Refer to Compliance, Doc. #4801 for information regarding adverse action letters. 
 
A loan placed in a final HMDA status of Denied, Withdrawn or Cancelled may not reactivated. A new 
loan application must be submitted along with all the required documentation. 
 
LOAN DISCLOSURES/SUBMISSIONS 
Refer to Compliance, Doc. #4801. 
 
ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGE (ARM) DISCLOSURE 
Per Federal Regulation Z it is required that an ARM disclosure is provided at time of application, or if 
application is taken by telephone or through a broker, must be mailed or delivered within 3 business 
days following receipt of application. In order to comply with this regulation, Underwriting will condition 
for the ARM disclosure prior to closing.  
 
ELIGIBILITY  
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS  
Flagstar Bank is committed to the fair and equal evaluation of credit applications. Discrimination based on 
the basis of the following factors is prohibited and will not be tolerated: race, color, religion, national origin, 
sex, marital status, family status, age (provided the applicant has the capacity to contract), disability status, 
sexual orientation, the fact that all or part of an applicant’s income derives from any public assistance 
program or the fact that the applicant has in good faith exercised any right under the Consumer Credit 
Protection Act (including Truth-in-Lending, Equal Credit Opportunity, Fair Housing Act, Fair Credit 
Reporting, Fair Debt Collection Practices and Consumer Leasing Acts.)  
 
Flagstar Bank will not lend to the following: 
•  Individuals and/or entities identified by the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) as prohibited. 
•  Irrevocable trusts  
•  Corporations, partnerships, estates or Life Estates, and Not-for-Profit Organizations, Schools, or 
Churches 
•  Non-resident aliens (i.e., foreign nationals) 
•  Persons with no legal residency status in the U.S. 
 
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
An applicant is defined as an individual who applies for secured financing with the obligation of paying 
the debt in full, with interest. A borrower is defined as the individual obligated to repay the secured loan 
in full, with interest. Flagstar Bank will lend to the following for real-estate transactions: 
•  Individuals of legal age 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      6 of 55      01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  U.S. citizens 
•  Lawful Permanent and Non-Permanent Resident Aliens  
 
BORROWER(S) AGE 
The Borrower must have reached the age at which the mortgage note can be legally enforced in the 
jurisdiction in which the property is located. There is no maximum age limit for a borrower. All 
applicants are evaluated on their ability to meet our underwriting guidelines. 
 
PERMANENT RESIDENT ALIEN 
A permanent resident alien (immigrant) is an individual who is lawfully accorded the privilege of residing 
permanently in the United States. Permanent Resident Aliens must be employed in the U.S. for the last 
12 months and document lawful residency as follows: 
 
  Documentation and Expiration 
Permanent Resident Alien status must be documented with a copy of the borrower(s)’ green 
card. 
•  Conditional 2-year green card- borrower must provide evidence of petition for permanent 
resident status if the card is expiring within 90 days of the application. 
•  Permanent green card with 10-year renewal- If the green card contains an expiration 
date, and will expire within 6 months of the application, the borrower must provide 
evidence of filing an I-90 form to replace the card. Note: an expired 10-year green card 
does not, in itself, impact the borrower’s status to lawfully reside in the United States. 
 
Refugees and Asylum Status 
Refugees and others seeking political asylum, who are immigrating to and seeking permanent 
residency in the United States, are classified under the permanent resident alien status. The INS 
has special immigration programs that enable these individuals to seek and accept employment 
while they are in the process of obtaining their permanent resident alien status, which generally will 
take from two to three years. 
 
Documentation and Expiration 
•  Refugees and asylees may provide valid form I-94 with the indicator of refugee or 
asylum admission status and copy of EAD card showing classification of A03 through 
A05. 
•  Refugee and Asylum status- If an EAD card expiration is within six months of the 
application the borrower must show evidence they have applied for an extension 
 
DACA Status 
For borrower’s with DACA, a work status that is under a deferred action, an unexpired employment 
authorization status (EAD Card C33) is required.  
 
Citizens of U.S. Territories 
For Citizens of Micronesia, Marshall Islands or Palau, an unexpired employment authorization 
status (EAD Card A08) is required. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      7 of 55      01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
NON-PERMANENT RESIDENT ALIEN 
Due to the inability to compel payment or seek judgment, transactions with individuals with diplomatic 
immunity who are not subject to United States jurisdiction are not eligible. Non-Permanent Resident 
Aliens must be employed in the U.S. for the last 24 months and document lawful residency as follows: 
 
  Documentation and Expiration 
All nonpermanent resident alien borrower(s) must verify they are legally present in the United 
States with a copy of one of the following: 
VISA 
  If expiration is within six months of the loan application and the borrower has not 
o
changed employers, a copy of the employer’s letter of sponsorship for visa renewal 
must be provided. 
  If Visa has expired, a valid USCIS Form I-797 confirming submitted application to 
o
renew. 
EAD Card 
  If expiration is within six months of the application the borrower must show evidence 
o
they have applied for an extension or provide letter from the employer indicating they 
will continue to sponsor their employment 
For residents of Canada or Mexico, H1-B status stamped on an unexpired passport   
For borrowers with income being used for qualification, see below for eligible VISA 
classifications. 
 
VISA Eligibility for Borrower’s with Income for Qualification 
Borrowers with any source of income being used for qualification must have one of the following VISA 
classifications and submit the appropriate documentation to support they are legally able to work within the 
United States. 
•  Some VISAs automatically grant work authorization and an EAD will not be issued.  
•  For certain VISA classes, spouses and dependents must be issued an EAD to work within the U.S.  
•  When an EAD is provided it must be associated with one of the acceptable VISA classes notes 
below.  
•  Refer to uscis.gov for the further guidance on associated VISA and EAD categories. 
VISA Series  Acceptable VISA Class  Description 
A Series   A-1, A-2 and A-3  Diplomat and foreign government official such as an 
    ambassador, consular officer or other top 
Must document that the  government official, spouse, dependents and 
borrower does not have  employees of a diplomat or official. A-2 can also 
diplomatic immunity.  classify as lower ranked foreign government 
  employees. 
 
EAD class C01 issued to dependents. 
E Series  E-1, E-2, E-3, E3D  Trade Treaty. International trader or investor, spouse 
and dependents. Employer Sponsored 
 
EAD class A17 issued to spouse.  
EAD class C02 may also be issued to dependents. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      8 of 55      01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
G Series  G-1, G-2, G-3, G-4, and G- Employees of International Organizations and 
  5  NATO. Internationally recognized staff, spouse and 
  dependents 
Must document that the   
borrower does not have  EAD class C04 issued to spouse and dependents 
diplomatic immunity. 
H Series  H-1B, H-1B1, H-1B2, H- Temporary Work VISA. An individual who is in the 
  1B3,   U.S. performing services of a professional nature in 
H-1C, and H-4  a specific position for a sponsoring employer 
 
EAD class C26 issued to spouse 
I Series  I  Foreign media representatives 
  
K Series   K-1 and K-3  Finance or spouse of U.S. Citizen 
   
EAD class A06 issued to fiancé(e) or dependent of 
K-1. EAD class A09 issued to spouse or dependent 
of K-3 
L Series   L-1A, L-1B, L-2  Temporary Work VISA. Intracompany transfer of an 
  executive or an employee with specialized 
knowledge, spouse and dependents 
 
EAD Class A18 issued to spouses 
NATO  NATO statuses 1 through  Employees of International Organizations and 
7  NATO. Representative of member state to NATO, 
  officials of NATO, support staff, spouse and 
Must document that the  dependents 
borrower does not have   
diplomatic immunity.  EAD class C07 issued to dependents 
O Series  O-1 and O-2  An individual who possesses extraordinary ability in 
  the sciences, arts, education, business, or athletics, 
or who has a demonstrated record of extraordinary 
achievement in the motion picture or television 
industry and has been recognized nationally or 
internationally for those achievements. Employer 
Sponsored. 
R Series  R-1  Religious Workers. Employer Sponsored 
TN  TN  Nonimmigrant NAFTA Professional visa (only 
issued to citizens of Canada and Mexico) Employer 
sponsored 
 
 
INELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  Non-Resident Aliens  
•  Foreign Nationals  
•  Borrowers with diplomatic status  
•  Life Estates  
•  Non-Revocable Trusts  
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      9 of 55      01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Land Trusts  
•  Guardianships  
•  LLCs, Corporations or Partnerships  
•  Borrower(s) with any ownership in a business that is federally prohibited, regardless if the income is 
not being considered for qualifying, will be considered an ineligible borrower. 
 
NUMBER OF BORROWERS 
The maximum number of borrowers on a loan transaction is limited to four.  
 
NUMBER OF FINANCED PROPERTIES 
There is no limit to the number of financed properties the borrower(s) may own. 
 
 
 
 
ADDING/REMOVING APPLICANTS ON APPLICATION 
Applicants cannot be removed after the application has been received by Flagstar. A decision must be 
rendered on the original application, and a new application must be received by Flagstar without the 
intended applicant. 
 
However, an applicant(s) may be added to the original application during the application process 
without creating a new transaction. 
 
 
POWER OF ATTORNEY 
A Power of Attorney (POA) is a legal document giving one-person (described as the agent or attorney-
in-fact) power to legally bind the borrower enacting the POA to the mortgage transaction.  
 
Owner Occupied and Second Homes only. Investment properties are not 
Eligible Occupancy 
eligible.  
Types 
 
When multiple borrowers are on the transaction, at least one borrower 
Borrower Eligibility 
must be present at closing.  
•  Must be specific to the transaction referencing the property address, 
unless the POA is a Military Durable POA. 
•  Signatures on the POA must match signatures in the file to Flagstar 
Power of Attorney  
Bank’s satisfaction (may not be eSigned). 
 
•  POA must be notarized. 
•  The POA must executed by the borrower prior to its use by the 
agent. 
The application and Purchase Agreement (if applicable) must be signed 
by all parties of the loan. 
 
Application 
A POA may sign the initial application only when the borrower is on 
 
military service servicing outside the U.S. or deployed on a U.S. vessel, 
as long as the POA expressly states the intent to secure a loan on the 
subject property 
Eligible Agent/ 
Family member of the borrower 
Attorney in Fact 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      10 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Title  The title policy must not make any exceptions to the use of a POA. 
 
 
CLOSING IN TRUST 
The following guidelines must be met: 
•  An attorney’s opinion letter stating all below warranties are met will be required on all loans 
closing in trust; or Certificate of Trust, Doc. #3954 or equivalent form. 
  For California properties, a certificate of trust is acceptable in lieu of an attorney’s 
o
opinion letter. 
  Refer to the California Trust Certificate, Doc. #3951 
o
•  The trust(s) must be a living revocable trust also known as a family trust or an inter vivos trust 
•  The title company must agree to insure over the trust with no exceptions for the trust or trustees 
•  A copy of the trust(s), or pertinent pages within the trust, must be included in the submission 
package 
•  The Settlor or grantor must be a natural person. The settlor must also be the trustee or one of 
the co-trustees 
•  The primary beneficiary of the trust must be the settlor or the grantor. If there is more than one 
settler or grantor, then there may be more than one primary beneficiary, as long as the income 
or assets of least one of the grantors or settlors will be used to qualify for the mortgage and that 
grantor or settlor will occupy the property and sign the mortgage instruments in their individual 
capacity 
•  The trust document must give the trustee or trustees the authority to mortgage trust assets, to 
incur debt on behalf of the trust, and to hold legal title to and manage trust assets. 
 
OCCUPANCY AND PROPERTY 
Inconsistencies in the loan file that raise questions about the authenticity of the proposed occupancy status as 
disclosed must be addressed to validate loan integrity. Examples may include significant or unrealistic 
commuting distance, close proximity between subject property and current primary residence. Flagstar, at its 
discretion, may determine the occupancy based on its current and best use. Properties occupied by a party 
other than the borrower will be considered an investment property. 
  
ELIGIBLE PROPERTIES 
•  Primary Residence  
  The residential property physically occupied by the owner(s) as their principal home 
o
domicile. 
•  Second Homes 
  Must be located reasonable distance away from the borrower’s principal primary residence 
o
  Restricted to 1-unit dwellings 
o
  Must be suitable for year-round occupancy 
o
  Must not be subject to any timeshare arrangement or other shared occupancy agreement 
o
  Property may not be rented or determined to be an investment property 
o
•  Residential Single-Family  
•  Owner-Occupied 2-4-unit Primary Residence 
•  Detached Condominiums and Condominiums, see below for additional requirements  
•  Planned Unit Developments (PUD) 
•  Modular Homes 
•  Leaseholds, see below for additional requirements 
•  Age-Based Resale Restricted properties 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      11 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTIES 
•  Investment Properties 
•  Manufactured/Mobile Homes (single or double-wide) 
•  Cooperative properties 
•  Resale Deed Restricted properties (age-based restricted only eligible) 
•  Vacant Land 
•  Properties currently listed for sale 
•  Properties located in the state of Texas 
•  Properties located in the U.S. Virgin Islands 
•  Properties in less than Average condition (C5 and C6 are not eligible) 
•  Properties under construction or renovation at time of loan closing 
  Construction/renovation cannot affect the safety, soundness or structural integrity of the 
o
subject property 
•  Properties titled as Life Estates or Land Trusts 
•  Properties located on Indian/Native American Tribal Land 
•  Unique properties including, but not limited, non-traditional property types such as barndominiums, 
berm earth houses, geodesic domes, container homes 
•  Properties without utilities (water, electric, gas, etc.) and/or utilities not meeting community 
standards (e.g. off-grid homes) 
•  Income producing properties with acreage, including but not limited to, working farms, ranches or 
orchards 
•  Properties located in Lava Zones 1 or 2 
•  Properties with environmental risk exposures to include, but not limited to, gas tanks, railroad 
tracks, high tension wires, UFFI, industrial areas, radon, mold, or Chinese Drywall.  
•  Properties that are not suitable for year-round occupancy, regardless of location 
•  Mixed-use properties, business use (primary function/modifications to property is non-residential in 
nature), included but not limited to:  
  Boarding Houses 
o
  Group Homes 
o
  Bed and Breakfasts 
o
  Daycare facility  
o
  Beauty/Barber Shops 
o
  Doctor Offices 
o
 
 
U.S. TERRITORIES  
Flagstar Bank does not currently lend on properties located in the following U.S. Territories: Guam, Puerto 
Rico, American Samoa and Northern Mariana Islands. 
 
PRESENT ADDRESS 
The borrower’s present address must be within the U.S. territories, or APO military addresses located 
within the U.S.   
 
WARRANTABLE CONDOMINIUMS 
•  FNMA Warrantable Condos 
•  Limited Review Eligible 
•  Detached condos (i.e. site condo) 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      12 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Each condominium project must be reviewed and approved by Flagstar’s Condo Review 
Department. Refer to Condominium Submission Instructions, Doc. #3253 for details. 
•  Please refer the Conventional Condominium Guidelines for project eligibility. 
 
DETACHED CONDO REQUIREMENTS 
When the underwriter performs a review for a mortgage secured by a detached unit, defined as any 
condo unit that is completely detached from other condo units in the project, the following eligibility 
criteria must be met: 
Review Eligibility Criteria for Detached Condo Units 
The mortgage is secured by a single detached unit in a condo project. 
The mortgage is not secured by a manufactured home. 
Project cannot be a condo-hotel, houseboat, timeshare project, or a project with segmented ownership. 
The appraiser commented on, and reflected in the appraisal report, any effect that buyer resistance to the 
condo form of ownership has on the market value of the individual unit. 
If the condo project is new, the appraiser used as a comparable sale at least one detached condo unit, 
which may be located either in a competing project or in the subject project, if the condo unit is offered by 
a builder other than the one that built the subject unit. 
The property is covered by hazard, flood, liability, and fidelity insurance 
Unit holders have an automatic non-severable interest in the homeowners’ association and pay 
mandatory assessments 
A condo rider will be required at closing  
 
LEASEHOLDS 
When the first mortgage was originated or is being serviced by Flagstar Bank, no further documentation is 
required.  If the first lien is not held or originated by Flagstar Bank, or when the HELOC is taking first lien 
position, an attorney’s opinion letter is required to verify the property is a FNMA eligible leasehold. 
 
INELIGIBLE FIRST LIENS 
Home equity transactions may not be closed behind the following ineligible first lien types: 
•  Land Contracts or Contracts for Deed 
•  Reverse Mortgages 
•  Negative Amortization Loans  
  Will be considered ineligible when disclosed as such by the applicant or if uncovered during 
o
the credit bureau investigation.  
•  Home Equity Lines of Credit or any other future advance liens (HELOCs in repayment period are 
eligible) 
 
When the first lien type cannot be determined from the credit report or other credible source, a copy of  
the first mortgage note may be requested to verify it is not an ineligible lien. 
 
INELIGIBLE PARTICIPANTS 
If any of the participants associated to the loan transaction are listed on Flagstar Bank’s internal ineligible 
list, the loan may not be approvable. 
 
ADDITIONAL SUBORDINATE FINANCING 
An existing Home Equity lien or non-first mortgage financing on title may be re-subordinated to the new 
HELOC. The following requirements must be met: 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      13 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Provide documentation that the lien will subordinate to a second or third lien position, as applicable  
•  Must meet CLTV requirements 
•  Subordination agreement must be provided at closing 
 
TRANSACTION TYPES 
All transactions will be classified as cash-out transactions.  
 
COMBINED LOAN TO VALUE 
LTV/CLTV/HCLTV is generally calculated based on the appraised value or valuation of the property. 
•  Properties purchased within 120 days of application will use the lesser of the purchase price or 
appraised value to calculate LTV/CLTV/HCLTV, measured from the date on which the property was 
purchased to the disbursement date of the new mortgage loan. 
•  There is no seasoning requirements for LTV/CTLV/HCLTV calculations where an occupying 
borrower is added to the title on a primary residence. For second homes, see title requirements 
below for additional restrictions. 
 
TITLE  
Flagstar will originate refinance loans secured by residential single-family homes. It is the responsibility of 
the Underwriting department to ensure the Bank has a first or second lien position that is perfected in 
accordance with applicable state law. 
 
The borrower must own the property in fee simple or leasehold interest. Title may also be held in a 
revocable “living” trust, also known as a family trust or an inter vivos trust. Land trusts are not acceptable. 
 
For second homes, the borrower must be also be a Note holder on any first lien held against the subject 
property, unless the borrower is the spouse of the Note holder and is present on title.  
 
SOLAR PANELS 
Ownership and financing/leasing structure of the subject property solar panels must be determined by 
evaluating documents including but not limited to the credit report, copy of related solar panel 
documentation and title commitment to address if the related debt is reflected in the land records.  
•  The monthly lease must be included in the DTI unless the lease is structured to:  
  Provide delivery of a specific amount of energy at a fixed payment during a given period, 
o
and  
  Have a production guarantee that compensates the borrower on a prorated basis in the 
o
event the solar panels fail to meet the energy output required for in the lease for that period. 
•  The payment on financed loan for solar panels must be included in the borrower’s obligations 
•  Property must maintain access to an alternative source of electric power that meets community 
standards. 
•  Only solar panels owned free and clear by the borrower may be included in the appraised value. 
Solar power leases, power purchase agreements and panels financed as personal property can be 
repossessed or removed from the property in the event of default. 
•  When financed as a fixture to real estate the loan must be included in the CLTV calculation and 
must obtain a subordination agreement or lien must be released, 
  Title confirmation or copy of UCC-1 Financing Statement may be required to determine if 
o
recorded against title to the Mortgaged Premises, creating a lien on the real estate itself 
(i.e., claiming an interest in both the solar panels and the real estate, not just the solar 
panels). 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      14 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
  Financed solar panels where the lien takes priority position, in other words will not 
o
subordinate, are not eligible (e.g. select PACE loans) and must be paid off prior to or at 
closing 
 
ESCROW REQUIREMENTS 
Escrows for taxes and insurance are not allowed for standalone home equity transactions. 
 
HAZARD 
Refer to Hazard Insurance Requirements, for specific hazard insurance guidelines.  
 
FLOOD 
Refer to Flood Insurance, Doc. #4603, for specific prior to closing flood insurance guidelines. 
 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE 
Not Applicable 
 
CREDIT 
INTRODUCTION 
An individual’s credit history, at origination, is considered to be an indicator of future credit performance. 
Applicants will be reviewed, to determine if there is an acceptable credit profile. An acceptable credit profile 
is established by compiling a financial history that, when viewed as a whole, reflects the applicant’s 
demonstrated ability to make ongoing payments on obligations.  
 
CREDIT REPORTS 
The credit report is an essential part of the loan file. It provides an up-to-date history of the applicant’s 
employment, residence, credit types, use, repayment pattern and overall performance of paying 
obligations. 
 
The credit report is good for 120 days and must contain complete information supplied by all repositories 
used and must be issued by an independent credit-reporting agency. The following type of credit report will 
be used: 
•  Tri-Merged Credit Report – includes credit information from at least three repositories and is used for 
real-estate transactions. A minimum of credit information from two bureaus is required to proceed 
with the transaction. 
 
Note: Credit should be current at the time of underwriting. Any loan with a credit report date greater than 
120 days will require a new credit report.  
 
EXTENDED FRAUD ALERTS OR ACTIVE MILITARY ALERTS 
Applicants with credit reports containing Extended Fraud Alerts or Active Military Alerts will be contacted by 
a Flagstar employee prior to a commitment letter being issued.  
 
CREDIT SCORING 
The credit score has proven to be a consistent predictor of performance compared to traditional 
underwriting and processing methods. Credit scoring offers consistency and objectivity, and gives the 
lender expanded capacity to accurately evaluate and underwrite a loan application with varying degrees of 
risk. 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      15 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
A tri-merge credit report is obtained from the three national credit bureaus. If three scores are obtained for 
a borrower, the middle score is used to qualify the borrower; when two scores are obtained for a borrower, 
the lower score is used. If there is more than one borrower on a mortgage loan, the credit score of the 
borrower with the lowest score (as calculated in accordance with the preceding sentence) is used. 
 
FROZEN CREDIT 
No more than one credit repository can have frozen credit information. The lower of the two available 
scores will be used for qualifying purchases 
 
CREDIT ANALYSIS 
The following items should be examined and considered when underwriting credit: 
•  Social Security Number red flags for incorrect number, duplicate numbers and multiple numbers are 
typically revealed in the credit report 
•  Compensating Factors of positive loan characteristics that add strength to a loan profile (e.g. strong 
equity position in a property being refinanced, borrower has a net worth substantial enough to 
ascertain his/her ability to repay the loan, borrower has demonstrated the ability to accumulate 
savings) 
•  Credit History changes in credit usage, derogatory credit, discrepancies, bankruptcy/foreclosure 
•  A high score does not mean automatic approval and a low score does not mean automatic denial 
 
CREDIT INQUIRIES 
The report must list all inquiries that were made in the previous 120 days. All loan applicants will be 
required to provide an explanation for all inquiries that were made in the previous 90 days on their 
credit report and any new debt must be added to the liabilities section of the 1003 and be supposed by 
applicable documentation. All applicants will be required to provide an explanation for all credit inquiries 
found during the loan process.  
 
TRADELINES 
•  Minimum 4 trade lines; one currently active and open for more than 12 months with a minimum 
high balance of $1,000, regardless of credit score 
•  Credit history showing 0x30 for all mortgages in last 12 months 
 
DISPUTED TRADELINES 
•  All disputed tradelines with a balance must be included in the DTI if the account belongs to the 
borrower 
•  A disputed account with a zero balance and no late payments, can be disregarded. 
 
TRADITIONAL CREDIT 
Traditional credit is typically presented in the form of a credit report that provides sufficient information with 
which to make an underwriting decision.  
NON-TRADITIONAL/ALTERNATIVE CREDIT 
Non-traditional/Alternative credit is not acceptable. Tradelines, or items such as collections, charge-
offs, “authorized user” accounts, deferred loans with no payment history, transferred accounts, not 
traditionally reported obligations (e.g. utilities) are all considered non-traditional tradelines.  
 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      16 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
DISPUTED CREDIT INFORMATION 
If a borrower indicates that any significant information in the credit file is inaccurate, such as reported 
accounts that do not belong to the borrower or derogatory information that is reported in error, the 
borrower should request the credit reporting company that provided that information to confirm its 
accuracy. If the credit reporting company confirms that the disputed information is incorrect, the 
information should be corrected and a new report obtained if the erroneous information significantly 
effects the underwriting of the file. 
 
VERIFICATION OF MORTGAGE-NOT ON CREDIT 
If there is a first lien on the subject property where the borrower is not a Note holder (e.g. mortgage 
held by another party on title), or is not reporting on credit, a verification of mortgage must be provided 
to verify no late or missed payments in the last 12 months. 
 
TEMPORARY VERIFICATION OF MORTGAGE REQUIREMENTS 
Credit Report must reflect 12 months of trended data to demonstrate timely payments made for all 
mortgages, both subject and non-subject, to demonstrate no late or missed payment in the last 12 
months or one of the following will be required: 
•  a loan payment history ledger from the servicer the last 12-months mortgage account 
statements and/or cancelled checks from the borrower 
•  a verification of mortgage from the servicer, including credit supplements verified with servicer 
name and contact provided, cannot be automated  
 
Loans in Forbearance 
•  Any loan (subject or non-subject property) in Forbearance with full or partially missed 
payments within the last 12 months will be considered late and ineligible. 
•  Any loan (subject or non-subject property) in a Forbearance without any missed payments 
over 30 days in the last 12 months may proceed and will not be required to exit Forbearance 
prior to the Note date. 
•  For mortgages identified with missed payments over 12 months old which resulted from a 
COVID-related forbearance, the borrower must have formally exited the forbearance by 
either 
  Reinstating the loan by repayment of the missed payments in full, or 
o
  Documenting a servicer approved resolution (e.g. payment deferral, repayment plan, 
o
or other modification) and verification of three subsequent full and timely payments 
made after the date of the approved servicer resolution 
  For COVID-related forbearance servicer resolutions only, standard modification 
o
timing requirements for derogatory events do not apply. 
 
SIGNIFICANT DEROGATORY CREDIT EVENTS 
The presence of significant derogatory credit events dramatically increases the likelihood of a future 
default and represents a significantly higher level of default risk.   
 
BANKRUPTCY, FORECLOSURE, DEED-IN-LIEU, SHORT SALE 
The underwriter must determine the significance of the derogatory event and verify sufficient time has 
elapsed since the date of the last derogatory event based on the distribution date of the new loan. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      17 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
Recovery Time Periods for Re- Recovery Time Periods for Re-
Significant 
Establishment of Credit with  Establishment of Credit with   
Derogatory Event 
Financial Mismanagement  Extenuating Circumstances 
 
Bankruptcy  A 4-year waiting period is required,  Primary Residence only 
(Chapter 7 or 11)  measured from the discharge or     
dismissal date of the bankruptcy action  A 2-year waiting period is permitted 
from the discharge or dismissal   
date of the bankruptcy action. 
 
Bankruptcy   2 years from the discharge date, or   Primary Residence only 
(Chapter 13)   4 years from the dismissal date     
A distinction is  A 2-year waiting period is permitted 
 
made between  after a Chapter 13 dismissal, if 
Chapter 13  extenuating circumstances can be   
bankruptcies that  documented. There are no 
were discharged  exceptions permitted to the 2-year 
and those were  waiting period after a Chapter 13 
dismissed.  discharge. 
Multiple Bankruptcy  For a borrower with more than one  Primary Residence only 
Filings  bankruptcy filing within the past 7 years,   
a 5-year waiting period is required from  A 3-year waiting period is permitted 
the most recent dismissal/discharge  if extenuating circumstances can 
date.  be documented, and measured 
from the most recent bankruptcy 
discharge of dismissal date. The 
most recent bankruptcy filing must 
have been the result of extenuating 
circumstances  
Foreclosure  A 7-year waiting period is required, and   
is measured from the completion date of  All cash out transactions are 
the foreclosure action as reported on the  prohibited 
credit report or other foreclosure 
documents provided by the borrower 
Deed-In-Lieu of  4-year date of completion or sale   Primary Residence only 
Foreclosure, Pre-  
foreclosure  2 years date of completion or sale 
Short sale, or 
Charge-off of 
mortgage account 
Extenuating Circumstances for Bankruptcy, Foreclosure, Deed-In-Lieu, Short Sales 
Extenuating circumstances are nonrecurring events that are beyond the borrower’s control that 
result in a sudden, significant, and prolonged reduction in income or a catastrophic increase in 
financial obligations.  
 
In order to support an extenuating circumstance and follow the reduced recovery time, listed above, 
the following requirements must be met: 
•  Documentation to support borrower’s claim must be provided. Examples include: 
  Copy of divorce decree 
o
  Medical bills  
o
  Notice of job layoff or severance papers 
o
  Additional documents that illustrate an inability to resolve the derogatory event 
o
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      18 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
  Insurance paper or claim settlements 
  Property listing agreements 
  Lease agreements 
  Tax returns covering the periods to, during and after the loss of employment 
•  Letter from borrower explaining the relevance of the documentation and support claims of 
the extenuating circumstances that led to the event. Letter to illustrate the borrower had no 
reasonable options other than the default on their financial obligations. 
 
COLLECTIONS ANDCHARGE-OFFS OF NON-MORTGAGE ACCOUNTS  
Accounts that are reported as past-due, not reported as collection accounts, must be brought current.  
•  For 1-unit, owner-occupied properties, borrowers are not required to pay off outstanding 
collections or charge-offs, regardless of the amount, provided the collection will not threated 
first-lien position.  
•  For 2 to 4-unit owner-occupied properties and second homes, collections and charge-offs 
totaling more than $5,000 must be paid in full prior to closing. 
 
Delinquent credit, including taxes, judgments, charge-offs of non-mortgage accounts, tax liens, and 
other liens that have the potential to affect lien position or diminish the borrower’s equity, must be paid 
off at or prior to closing. 
 
JUDGMENTS, GARNISHMENTS, AND LIENS 
Open judgments, garnishments, and all outstanding liens that are in the public records section of the 
credit report will be identified and must be paid off prior to closing. Documentation of the satisfaction of 
these liabilities, along will verification of funds sufficient to satisfy these obligations, must also be 
obtained. 
GARNISHMENTS  
Garnishments, generally disclosed as a deduction on paystubs, with more than 10 months remaining 
must be included in the monthly debt obligations. 
 
LIABILITIES 
INTRODUCTION 
The applicant’s financial obligations in relation to income are key in determining the borrower’s ability to 
repay debt. The applicant must be able to meet all existing liabilities and monthly obligations, as well as the 
new obligation. 
 
Liabilities include all revolving charges, installment debts, real estate loans, stock pledges, alimony, child 
support, and other consistent and recurring expenses. They do not include items such as utility bills, food, 
and clothing expenditures. These items are considered within debt burden ratios. 
 
DEBT-TO-INCOME (DTI) RATIO 
Monthly DTI ratio is the sum of the monthly Principal and interest, Taxes, and Insurance plus one or more 
of the following: 
•  Minimum monthly payments on revolving debt  
•  Monthly installment debt extending beyond 10 months5 
•  Lease payments will be included regardless of number of payments remaining 
•  Other consistent, recurring expenses as detailed in the “Recurring Debt” section below 
•  Monthly PITI for primary residence, second homes, and other investment properties that are non-
income producing real estate 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      19 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Current real estate taxes and hazard insurance premiums for real estate owned that is free of any 
lien 
•  Association Dues or other condominium fees, if applicable (written verification of fee amount is not 
required; it is acceptable to use the stated amount so long as it appears reasonable; however, 
confirmation may be documented via appraisal or bank statements) 
•  Child support, alimony, or separate maintenance payments extending beyond 10 months * 
 
*NOTE: installment debts lasting less than 10 months must be included if the amount of the debt 
affects the applicant’s ability to pay the loan during the months immediately after loan closing, 
especially if the applicant will have limited or no cash assets after loan closing. 
 
Example  
If the borrower owes $3,000 on his vehicle loan with only 10 payments remaining and has $5,000 in 
a savings account, the underwriter may choose to omit the monthly payment from the DTI as the 
applicant has sufficient funds to cover the outstanding balance. 
 
RECURRING DEBT 
Flagstar considers any debt the borrower owes to be a liability. Debt is defined as borrowed money, the 
repayment of which may be either secured or unsecured, with various possible repayment schedules. The 
following are examples of recurring debt: 
 
REVOLVING DEBT 
Revolving debt is an arrangement for credit in which the applicant is granted a credit limit and can use 
any amount up to the limit. Credit cards are an example of revolving debt. The following should be 
included in the DTI ratio: 
•  The minimum payment (from statement or credit report); or  
•  If no payment is stated on the credit report, use the greater of $10 or 5% of current balance 
•  Authorized User Accounts – the payment is excluded from the DTI ratio 
 
OPEN 30-DAY CHARGE ACCOUNTS 
For open 30-day charge accounts (for example, Amex), the borrower must have sufficient verified liquid 
assets to pay off the balance and meet the reserve requirements for the loan program to exclude the 
payment from the qualifying DTI. 
•  If sufficient liquid assets are verified exclude the reported monthly payment from the DTI. 
•  If sufficient liquid assets are not verified obtain evidence that the account has been paid in full 
and exclude the reported monthly payment from the DTI, or include the monthly payment (equal 
to the outstanding account balance) in the calculation of the qualifying DTI. 
•  If the account provides for a monthly payment option other than the total outstanding balance, 
the account is not considered a 30-day charge account and these requirements do not apply. 
 
OVERDRAFT PROTECTION ACCOUNT 
Overdraft protection is considered a revolving line of credit that is attached to a checking account. If 
there is not a payment listed in the credit report, a minimum payment of 5% or $25, whichever is 
greater, will be included in the DTI ratios. 
 
INSTALLMENT LOANS 
Installment debt is borrowed money that is repaid in several successive payments, usually at regular 
intervals, for a specific amount and for a specific term. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      20 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Installment debts with monthly payments that extend beyond 10 months should be included in 
the DTI ratio 
•  Even if the debt does not extend beyond 10 months, it must be noted whether the size and/or 
number of remaining payments will impact the borrower’s ability to handle the new debt during 
the early part of the loan 
•  For purposes of qualifying, the borrower may pay off the installment debt 
•  If debt is paid by the borrower’s business, it does not need to be included as a liability if 
sufficient documentation is provided. Documentation may include: 
  Copies of 12 month’s canceled business checks, or  
o
  Tax returns showing debt repayment from the business  
o
 
Timeshares 
Timeshares to be considered installment debt and not classified as real estate owned, regardless if 
reported on credit as a mortgage loan. 
 
UNSECURED LOANS 
Unsecured loans are personal loans that were given without benefit of security and have the same 
repayment terms as installment loans. 
 
LEASED OBLIGATIONS 
A lease is a written document containing the conditions under which property is given to an individual 
for a specific period of time. 
•  The monthly payment for the leased item should always be included in the DTI, regardless of 
remaining term 
•  If lease is paid by the applicant’s business, the debt does not need to be included as a liability if 
sufficient documentation is provided. Documentation includes copies of 12 month’s canceled 
business checks 
 
CHILD SUPPORT/ALIMONY/MAINTENANCE 
Payments of child support and separate maintenance are considered recurring debts. Acceptable 
sources of documentation include: 
•  Copy of applicable page(s) and signature page of the Divorce Decree, or 
•  Property settlement, or 
•  Separation Agreement 
 
If payments are being paid through the court, a letter from the court verifying the dollar amount is 
sufficient. Obligations that will end within 10 months of application do not need to be included in the DTI 
ratio. However, the size and number of the new payment should not impact the applicant’s ability to 
handle the new payment during the early period of the loan. 
 
CONTINGENT LIABILITIES (CO-BORROWER/CO-SIGNED DEBT) 
Contingent Liabilities exist when an applicant co-signs another person’s loan or is a co-borrower on an 
existing loan. As a co-borrower/co-signer, the individual has equal responsibility in repaying the loan 
should the loan go into default. 
 
Debts indicating that the applicant is a co-signer will be included in the DTI ratio if the remaining term is 
greater than 10 months and if the amount of the debt does not affect the applicant’s ability to pay the 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      21 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
loan during the months immediately after loan closing; all revolving debts will be included regardless of 
the remaining term. 
 
The debt is not included if the documentation in the file clearly substantiates that the other signer has 
been paying the debt for at least 12 months, and on a timely basis for at least 12 months. If payments 
are not made on a timely basis, or if they cannot be sufficiently documented, the debt should be 
included as a recurring liability. Acceptable documentation includes: canceled checks, other party’s 
bank statements showing monthly amounts disbursed, canceled cashier’s checks, money order 
receipts or Divorce Decree indicating the debt is the responsibility of another party. 
 
STUDENT LOANS 
If a monthly student loan payment is provided on the credit report, the lender may use that amount for 
qualifying purposes. If the credit report does not reflect the correct monthly payment, the lender may 
use the monthly payment that is on the student loan documentation (the most recent student loan 
statement) to qualify the borrower.  
 
If the credit report does not provide a monthly payment for the student loan, or if the credit report shows 
$0 as the monthly payment, the lender must determine the qualifying monthly payment using one of the 
options below.  
•  If the borrower is on an income-driven payment plan, the lender may obtain student loan 
documentation to verify the actual monthly payment.  If the payment is $0 the borrower must qualify 
using one of the following: 
•  For deferred loans, loans in forbearance, or income-driven payment of $0 the lender must calculate  
  a payment equal to 1% of the outstanding student loan balance, or  
o
  a fully amortizing payment using the documented loan repayment terms.  
o
 
DEFERRED LOANS (OTHER THAN STUDENT LOANS) 
Deferred installment debt must always be included in the applicant’s monthly recurring obligations. If 
the credit report does not indicate a monthly payment at the end of the deferment period, a payment of 
2% of the outstanding balance will be calculated and included in the DTI ratio. If the loan is deferred 
beyond the term of the loan, the payment can be excluded from the DTI ratio.  
 
DEMAND LOANS 
A demand loan has no monthly payment; it becomes due and is payable in full on a particular date. 
This type of debt may or may not be secured. 
•  If the note is due within the next two years and the applicant does not have adequate reserves 
available to repay the obligation in full, the transaction should be treated as an installment loan, 
and the minimum payment that will be included in the DTI ratio will be calculated by dividing the 
outstanding balance by the remaining loan term. 
•  If the applicant does have adequate reserves available to pay the obligation in full, the debt 
should not be included in the DTI ratio. 
 
Example 
If the outstanding balance is $24,000 and the loan is due in full in 24 months, then the payment that 
will be included in the monthly DTI ratio is $1,000 [$24,000/24 = $1,000].  
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      22 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
CASH MARGIN LOAN/BORROWED FUNDS AGAINST ASSETS 
The applicant may take a loan against a liquid asset that is secured by stocks, bonds, or any other 
investment account. Although information regarding the amount of the loan must be provided, the debt 
is not included in the DTI ratio. 
 
OBLIGATIONS NOT CONSIDERED DEBT 
Obligations that are not considered debt, and therefore not subtracted from gross income, include: 
•  Federal, State, and local taxes (unless court ordered garnishments exist); 
•  Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) or other retirement contributions, such as 401(k) 
accounts (including repayment of debt secured by these funds) 
•  Commuting costs; 
•  Union dues; 
•  Open accounts with zero balances; 
•  Automatic deductions to savings accounts; 
•  Child care (unless court ordered child support); and  
•  Voluntary deductions. 
 
PAYOFF OF DEBT TO QUALIFY 
•  Paying down revolving debt and/or installment to qualify is not acceptable (e.g. cannot pay 
installment down to 10 payments or less) 
•  Lease payments may not be paid down or paid off for qualifying purposes  
•  Paying off revolving debt and/or installment loans to qualify is allowed to be paid prior to or at time 
of closing  
  When paid off prior to close documentation must be provided to source funds and confirm 
o
zero balance 
 
ASSETS 
INTRODUCTION 
Assets are an indicator of, and may be used to highlight an applicant’s creditworthiness and financial 
strength. The applicant should have sufficient net worth – cash or other equity – in order to cover any costs 
associated with the new loan and/or to mitigate any shortfall in capacity to repay the loan. 
 
Asset verification will be required in which the applicant must bring $3,000 or more to closing, or as 
deemed necessary by the underwriter. 
 
For example, the underwriter may stipulate the verification of assets if the applicant has an outstanding tax 
obligation of $2,500, and it appears the applicant may have limited or no cash assets after loan closing. 
 
LOAN VERIFICATIONS 
All Verifications of Deposit (VOD), Verbal Verifications for Employment (VVOE), Written Verifications of 
Employment (WVOE [form 1005]), and Verifications of Mortgage or Rent (VOM) must be sent directly 
by the lender and received back directly to the lender without being transmitted through the applicant or 
any other party. We do not allow verifications to be hand carried. Flagstar Bank reserves the right to 
verbally verify the information on a VVOE, WVOE, VOM or VOD with the borrower’s employer/asset 
holder. 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      23 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
VERIFICATION OF ASSETS 
•  Monthly bank statements must be dated within 45 days of application.  
  If the latest bank statement is more than 45 days earlier than the date of the loan 
o
application, the borrower must provide a more recent supplemental bank-generated form 
that shows the account number, balance and date. 
•  Quarterly statements must be dated with 90 days of application.  
•  Depository and Investment accounts statement covering the most recent two-month period. 
•  The most recent retirement statement available.  
•  Asset statements must clearly identify the borrower as the account holder, include the account 
number, the transaction history from the time period covered by the statement(s). 
•  Verifications of source of funds may be dated up to 120 days before the date of the note.  
•  Documents that are "faxed" to the lender or that the borrower downloads from the Internet must 
clearly identify the name of the depository or investment institution and the source of the 
information at the top of the document 
 
REQUEST FOR VERIFICATION OF DEPOSIT 
The Request for Verification of Deposit may be used to verify activity in the borrower's depository 
accounts. When the borrower authorizes the lender to obtain this information directly from the different 
depository institutions in which he or she has accounts by signing the Form 1006 or 1006(S), the 
depository institutions must complete, sign and date the form and return it directly to the lender. The 
Verification of Deposit should not be handled by the borrower. Rather than requiring the borrower to 
sign multiple verification forms, the lender may have the borrower sign a borrower's signature 
authorization form. 
 
•  When a Verification of Deposit (Form 1006 or Form 1006[S]) (VOD) is used and depository 
activity is not included, the lender must verify the source of funds for accounts opened within the 
last 90 days of the application date, and 
•  Account balances that are considerably greater than the average balance reflected on the VOD. 
 
TYPES OF ASSETS 
The following asset types may be used for closing costs. See additional guidelines for requirements when 
assets may be required for reserves (e.g. income or debt obligations). 
 
CHECKING AND SAVINGS ACCOUNTS 
Bank statements must clearly identify the borrower as the account holder and include the account 
number, the time period covered by the statement, all deposits and withdrawal transactions (for a 
depository account) or all purchase and sale transactions and the ending account balance. 
   
RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS 
Retirement account statements must identify the borrower's vested amount and the terms and 
conditions for loans or the withdrawal of funds. 
 
STOCKS, BONDS AND MUTUAL FUNDS 
Stocks, government bonds and mutual funds are acceptable sources of funds if their value can be 
verified.  
•  The value of stocks, bonds and mutual funds (net of any margin accounts) may be verified by 
referencing the most recent monthly or quarterly statement from the depository or investment 
firm.  A photocopy of the stock certificate, accompanied by a newspaper stock list that is dated 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      24 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
as of or near the date of the loan application, may also be used to document stock ownership 
and value. 
•  The value of government bonds should be based on their purchase price unless the redemption 
value can be documented. 
•  When used for the down payment or closing costs, if the value of the asset (as determined 
above) is at least 20% more than the amount of funds needed for the down payment and 
closing costs, no documentation of the borrower’s actual receipt of funds realized from the sale 
or liquidation is required. Otherwise, evidence of the borrower’s actual receipt of funds realized 
from the sale or liquidation must be documented. 
•  Vested Stock Option are eligible source of borrower funds and reserves, and must be 
documented with the following: 
  Account statements covering a two-month period or direct account verification (i.e., 
o
VOD) confirming the number of vested shares and current value 
  If the borrower does not receive a stock/security account statement for the stock options, 
o
the originator must: 
• Provide a statement verifying the number of vested shares owned by the 
borrower 
• Provide the current stock price from a published source to determine the value 
 
TRUST ACCOUNTS 
Funds disbursed from a borrower's trust account are an acceptable source of funds if the borrower has 
immediate access to them. The trust manager or trustee must verify the value of the trust account and 
to confirm the conditions under which the borrower has access to the funds. The effect, if any is that the 
withdrawal of funds from the account will have on any trust income that is used in qualifying the 
borrower for the mortgage must also be documented. 
 
LARGE DEPOSIT 
When bank statements are used, the lender must evaluate large deposits, which are defined as a 
single deposit that exceeds 50% of the total monthly qualifying income (includes income derived from 
the asset calculation establishing the debt payment-to-income ratio) for the loan.   
 
All large deposits should be reviewed for indications of recently opened liabilities resulting from 
borrowed funds or any indication that the funds used to cover closing costs, or reserves generated from 
an unacceptable source. 
 
If funds from a large deposit are needed to complete the transaction, i.e., are used for closing costs, the 
lender must document that those funds are from an acceptable source. Occasionally, a borrower may 
not have all of the documentation required to confirm the source of a deposit. In those instances, the 
lender must use reasonable judgment based on the available documentation as well as the borrower’s 
debt-to-income ratio and overall income and credit profile. Examples of acceptable documentation 
include the borrower’s written explanation, proof of ownership of an asset that was sold, or a copy of a 
wedding invitation to support receipt of gift funds. The lender must place in the loan file written 
documentation of the rationale for using the funds. 
  Verified funds must be reduced by the amount, or portion, of the undocumented large 
o
deposit, as defined above, and the lender must confirm that the remaining funds are 
sufficient for the down payment, closing costs, and financial reserves. When the lender 
uses a reduced asset amount, net of the unsourced amount of a large deposit, that 
reduced amount, must be used for underwriting purposes.  When a deposit has both 
sourced and unsourced portions, only the unsourced portion must be used to calculate 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      25 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
whether or not it must be considered a large deposit. See examples below: 
• Scenario 1: 
•  Borrower has monthly income of $4,000 and an account at ABC bank 
with a balance of $20,000. A deposit of $3,000 is identified, but $2,500 of 
that deposit is documented as coming from the borrower's federal income 
tax refund. 
•  Only the unsourced $500, the deposit of $3,000 minus the documented 
$2,500, must be considered in calculating whether it meets the large 
deposit definition. 
•  The unsourced $500 is 12.5% of the borrower’s $4,000 monthly income, 
falling short of the 50% definition of a large deposit.  
•  Therefore, it is not considered a large deposit and the entire $20,000 
balance in the ABC bank account can be used for underwriting purposes. 
• Scenario 2: 
•  Using the same borrower example, a deposit of $3,000 is identified, but 
only $500 is documented as coming from the borrower’s federal income 
tax refund, leaving $2,500 unsourced. 
•  In this instance, the unsourced $2,500 is 63% of the borrower’s $4,000 
monthly income, which does meet the definition of a large deposit. 
•  Therefore, the unsourced $2,500 must be subtracted from the account 
balance of $20,000 and only the remaining $17,500 may be used for 
underwriting purposes. 
 
Note: If the source of a large deposit is readily identifiable on the account statement(s), such as a direct 
deposit from an employer (payroll), the Social Security Administration, or IRS or state income tax 
refund, or a transfer of funds between verified accounts, and the source of the deposit is printed on the 
statement, the lender does not need to obtain further explanation or documentation.  However, if the 
source of the deposit is printed on the statement but the lender still has questions as to whether the 
funds may have been borrowed, the lender should obtain additional documentation. 
 
EMPLOYMENT & INCOME 
INTRODUCTION 
Employment and income are essential for loan repayment. Qualifying income should be stable, predictable, 
and likely to continue. The applicant must demonstrate the financial wherewithal to repay the proposed 
loan transaction as well as other obligations. 
 
SOURCES OF INCOME 
ACCEPTABLE SOURCES OF INCOME 
Sources of income/liquidity/repayment may vary. Some receive primary income from only one source, 
while others have a diversified portfolio and may receive income from several sources. Acceptable 
sources which demonstrate ongoing sufficiency of repayment capacity and that can be utilized in the 
analysis of a borrower’s income projections include: 
•  Wage-Earner Income: All non-self-employed applicants who receive a W-2 at year end to 
summarize total earnings – includes hourly, weekly, biweekly, part-time, seasonal, bonus, 
commission, and tips/gratuity. 
•  Self-Employed Income: Sole proprietorship, Partnership, Corporations, and S-Corporations 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      26 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Other Non-Employment Income: Alimony/Child Support/Maintenance, Unemployment/Public 
Assistance, Disability/Worker’s Compensation, Retirement/Pension, Social Security, Annuity, 
IRA, Military/VA Benefits, Trust, Interest & Dividend, Inheritance/Guaranteed Income, Note 
Receivables, Mortgage Differential/COLA & Rental 
•  Readily Convertible Assets: Bank Deposits, Money Market, Marketable Securities, Mutual 
Funds, Annuities, and Bonds 
 
UNACCEPTABLE SOURCES OF INCOME 
•  Income based on future earnings (unless documented from a source such as social security 
income or retirement account/annuity/disability or other sources of protected income based 
upon reliability and regularity of income where the source and term are verifiable). 
•  Draw Income 
•  Capital Withdrawals 
•  VA Education Benefits 
•  Income from Mortgage Certificates 
•  Illegal Income/Income not listed on tax returns 
•  Any income that cannot be documented and verified 
•  Room/Boarder rent from subject property 
•  Income derived from an activity that is prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and 
regulations cannot be considered. This applies to both W2 and self-employment, regardless if 
reporting income or loss. Income sources may include, but not limited to: 
  Foreign shell banks 
o
  Medical marijuana dispensaries 
o
  Any business or activity related to marijuana or CBD (e.g. growing, processing, distribution, 
o
etc) even if legally permitted under state or local law. 
  Businesses engaged in any type of internet gambling. 
o
•  Income derived from virtual currency, such as cryptocurrency, including but not limited to: 
  Income paid to or earned by the borrower in the form of cryptocurrency 
o
  Assets to establish income continuance such as retirement distributions, trust or 
o
dividend/interest income 
  Use in assets as a basis for repayment of obligations 
o
  Rental payments. When a lease is necessary the payment on the lease must be reflected in 
o
U.S. dollars. 
 
FOREIGN INCOME 
Foreign income is income earned from a foreign corporation or a foreign government and is paid in 
foreign currency. Borrowers may use foreign income to qualify if the following requirements are met: 
•  All income must be converted to US dollars based on the exchange rate at the time of 
underwriting for qualifying purposes. 
•  All written communication must be presented in English or translated to English by a certified 
translator. 
 
Foreign Income – US Citizen Resident Alien (Green Card) 
Residency  Occupancy  Verification  Ineligible 
May live  Copies of his or her signed  Self-employed borrower 
abroad, but  Subject to  federal income tax returns filed  who earns the self-
must still  underwriter’s  with the IRS for the past two  employments income 
maintain a  discretion  years that include foreign  from a country other 
present  income verified with 4506C  than the United States 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      27 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
address  Foreign earned pension  and is not reported on 
within the US  converted to US currency  Schedule C or Schedule 
E of the borrowers 
1040’s. 
Documentation to satisfy the  Unlawful aliens not 
standard documentation  eligible 
requirements 
 
Foreign Income – Non-Permanent Resident Alien (Visa) 
Residency  Occupancy  Verification  Ineligible 
Copies of his or her signed  Self-employed borrower 
federal income tax returns filed  who earns the self-
with the IRS for the past two  employments income 
Must  years that include foreign  from a country other 
currently and  Subject to  income verified with 4506C  than the United States.  
lawfully  underwriter’s  Foreign earned pension  Previously self-
reside in the  discretion  converted to US currency  employed borrowers are 
US  not eligible 
Documentation to satisfy the 
Unlawful aliens not 
standard documentation 
eligible 
requirements 
 
INCOME DOCUMENTATION 
HELOC – LOAN AMOUNTS ≤ $150,000 
Previous year's  
Paystub OR The  Most recent year's 
W-2 OR The Work 
Work Number with  personal and 
Scenario  Number with  Tax transcripts 
verification of  business tax 
verification of 
income  returns 
income 
Hourly/Salary Base 
X       
Only 
Hourly/Salary with 
X  X     
OT or Bonus 
Commission  X  X     
Self-Employed      X  X 
 
HELOC – LOAN AMOUNTS > $150,000 
Previous year's 
Paystub OR The  Most recent two 
 W-2 OR The Work 
Work Number with  year's personal 
Scenario  Number with   Tax transcripts 
verification of  and business tax 
verification of 
income  returns 
income 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      28 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Hourly/Salary Base 
X  X     
Only 
Hourly/Salary with 
X  X     
OT or Bonus 
Commission  X  X     
Self-Employed      X  X 
 
HELOC – ALL LOAN AMOUNTS 
See Other Non-Employment Income for additional income requirements not included below. 
One of the Following: 
Scenario  Most recent year’s 
Award Letter or  Bank statement 
1099  personal tax 
Pension Statement  with Direct Deposit 
returns1 
Social Security 
(SSI and SSD)  X  X  X  X 
Pension  X  X  X  X 
1 When tax returns are used to determine income, tax transcripts are required 
 
EMPLOYMENT 
The applicant’s past employment record and the employer’s confirmation of current, ongoing employment 
status should be examined when analyzing employment. Flagstar should confirm applicant has been 
employed for the past 2 years (hourly/salaried/commissioned/self-employed). The depth and breadth of 
employment and income verification should be commensurate with the type and size of the transaction, 
and the applicant’s credit risk profile.  
 
Applicants with non-consecutive and/or non-reoccurring employment histories must have financial 
strengths in order to be considered for maximum financing. Applicants who work in certain industries may 
experience frequent job changes due to the nature of the work (e.g. seasonal or unskilled labor). In these 
instances, applicants will be considered if they are able to demonstrate the ability to maintain a steady 
income despite the changes. 
 
 
EMPLOYMENT DOCUMENTATION 
This section addresses the sources of documentation that may be used to verify salary/wage earner 
income and the principle methods of validating authenticity. 
 
Telephone Verification (VVOE) 
The phone number the applicant provided as their employer’s number must be independently 
confirmed by using the phone book, or other source, such as the internet. Contact with the 
employer must be documented in writing, or captured in the underwriting system and include the 
name of person contacting the employer, company name, name and title of the person confirming 
the information, date of contact, and information that was verified. 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      29 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Pay Stubs  
Must be computer generated and include the following information in order for it to be considered 
an acceptable form of verification: company’s name or employer Tax I.D. that matches the W-2, 
name and/or social security number of the employee, the pay period covered, the year-to-date 
gross earnings, list all deductions. Paystubs must be dated within 120 days of the Note date. 
 
W-2’s  
A W-2 form is a summary of earnings statement that the employer prepares and sends to its 
employees at the end of the year. 
 
Loan amounts over $150,000, a copy of the most recent year W-2 is required to verify annual 
income and employment for each borrower. 
 
Form 4506/4506-C  
If pay stubs do not contain all required information and tax returns are used to verify income, the 
applicant must also sign a 4506 form. The form may be required at application or closing. 
 
Verification of Employment (WVOE) Form  
A written VOE showing year-to-date income may be substituted for a verbal VOE, pay stub(s) and 
W-2(s), provided it contains year-to-date earnings and the prior year’s earnings. The VOE must be 
completed, signed, and dated by the owner, partner, or Human Resources representative, along 
with the date and phone number. Forms completed by the applicant will not be accepted. 
 
Internet Verifications  
Downloads from the Internet are acceptable provided they meet all general guidelines outlined in 
this section. The existence of the web site from which the documents were derived must be verified. 
Printed web pages must show the uniform resource locator (URL) address and the date and time 
printed. 
 
EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATION 
VERIFICATION OF EMPLOYMENT (VOE) 
The phone number the applicant provided as their employer’s number must be independently 
confirmed by using the phone book or other source, such as, the internet. Contact with the employer 
must be documented in writing, or captured in the underwriting system, and include the name of person 
contacting the employer, company name, name and title of the person confirming the information, date 
of contact, and information that was verified. 
 
Income Type  Requirements 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      30 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Verbal verification of employment is required on currently employed wage 
earners when: 
•  the loan amount is greater than $100,000; OR,  
•  the loan amount is greater than $75,000 AND the CLTV is greater than 
80%. 
 
The VVOE must be dated within 10 business days of the Note date unless the 
Wage Earner 
following applies: 
•  If a borrower is in the military, a military Leave and Earnings Statement 
(LES) dated within 30 days of the closing is acceptable in lieu of a 
verbal or written VOE.  
•  Because third party vendor databases are typically updated monthly, 
the verification must evidence that the information in the vendor’s 
database was not more than 35 days old as of the Note date 
Self-employed  Verification business is in operation is required within 20 business days of the 
borrower  Note date 
 
Self-Employment Verification 
The existence of the borrower’s business must be verified from a third- party source. Acceptable 
third- party sources include the following:  
•  CPA, regulatory agency, or the applicable licensing bureau, if possible, or  
•  By verifying a phone listing and address for the borrower’s business using the internet or 
directory assistance.  
 
TAX TRANSCRIPTS 
When tax returns are used to document the qualifying income, the most recent (1) year tax transcripts 
results will be required regardless of the number of applicable years required unless the following apply: 
•  Transcripts are not required if the borrower is an existing Flagstar customer with one of the 
following: 
  Transcripts were previously obtained/provided to Flagstar for most recent year used for 
o
qualification  
  There is no significant increase (defined as 10%) to the income source based on the last 
o
available transcript for the borrower  
  Borrower has a satisfactory mortgage payment history of at least 12 months with Flagstar 
o
 
BORROWER EMPLOYED BY FAMILY MEMBER 
Provide the most recent two (2) years personal tax returns with all schedules to determine stability of 
income and potential ownership interest to document less than 25% ownership. 
 
EMPLOYMENT STABILITY 
INCOME ADEQUACY & CONTINUANCE 
The applicant should have a history of generating steady income for at least 2 years*. Qualifying 
income must be: 
•  Recurring; 
•  Received regularly 
•  Received in cash (includes check, wire-transfer, etc.) and paid tax on the income as evidenced 
by a U.S. tax return; 
•  Reasonable based on the source 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      31 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
The applicant must be receiving income if it is to be included as qualifying income. However, the 
potential to increase income may be considered a strong compensating factor if the applicant has 
recently completed education and/or training to enhance job opportunities/income. Income should be 
expected to continue during the entire term of the Note. 
 
EMPLOYMENT GAP 
Explain any gaps in excess of 60 days during the past two years. 
•  Allowances can be made for seasonal employment gaps beyond 60 days, typical for the building 
trades and agricultural, if documented. 
•  Income received from secondary employment or multiple job sources, there may be no gap greater 
than 30 days in the last 12 months. 
•   
 
NEWLY ENTERING THE WORKFORCE 
For a Borrower who has less than a two-year employment and income history, the Borrower's income 
may be qualifying income if the Mortgage file contains documentation to support that the Borrower was 
either attending school or in a training program immediately prior to their current employment history. 
School transcripts must be provided to document. 
 
WAGE EARNER INCOME 
Wage earner income is defined as compensation for services paid by a person, business, or 
organization at specified intervals is commonly referred to as salary or wage earner income. The pay 
schedules of wage earners can be classified into four general categories: 
 
Full Time  
The applicant is a permanent employee of a company and works a standard work week, usually 
totaling 35 to 40 hours a week. 
 
Part Time 
The applicant is a permanent employee of a company but the number of hours is not standardized, 
usually totaling less than 30 hours per week. 
 
Temporary  
The applicant is not a permanent employee of the company and therefore is not part of the 
company’s permanent staff. Temporary employees usually work for contracted, or “as needed” 
period of time. 
 
Occasional/Seasonal  
The applicant works for a specified period of time on a specific job or project. Once completed, the 
applicant is on “standby” until he/she receives their next assignment (e.g. roofers, landscapers, and 
migrant farm workers) 
 
If a wage earner intends to use income from other sources to qualify, the income may be considered 
stable to the extent that it is consistent and it is expected to continue based on the required 
documentation.  
 
CONSUMERS RETURNING TO WORK AFTER AN EXTENDED ABSENCE 
A consumer's income may be considered effective and stable when recently returning to work after an 
extended absence if he/she: 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      32 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Is employed in the current job for six months or longer; and 
•  Can document a two-year work history prior to an absence from employment using: 
•  Traditional employment verifications; and/or 
•  Copies of IRS Form W-2s or pay stubs. 
 
Note: An acceptable employment situation includes individuals who took several years off from 
employment to raise children, then returned to the workforce.  Important: Situations not meeting the 
criteria listed above may not be used in qualifying. Extended absence is defined as six months. 
 
CALCULATING EMPLOYMENT INCOME 
CONVERTING FROM PART TIME TO FULL TIME 
When a borrower is converting from part time to full time with the same employer, the income must be 
documented with a paystub reflecting 30 days year-to-date earnings of full-time employment along with 
a WVOE to document the date the borrower transitioned to full time in order to use the current wages. 
 
PRIMARY EMPLOYMENT LESS THAN 40 HOURS 
When an applicant’s primary employment is less than a typical 40- hour work week, the underwriter 
should evaluate the stability of that income as regular, on-going primary employment.  
 
For example, a registered nurse may have worked 24 hours per week for the last year; although this job 
is less than the 40-hour work week, it is the applicant’s primary employment and should be treated as 
such for qualifying purposes. 
 
CALCULATING WAGE EARNER INCOME 
Individuals either receive a fixed regular annual income, usually paid monthly, semimonthly, biweekly, 
or weekly, or they may work and get paid by the hour, day, or week. All receive regular compensation in 
the form of a paycheck and year-end income is reported via W-2. Each type of qualifying income is 
calculated differently. 
 
Non-Fluctuating Employment Earnings 
Pay Period   Calculation of Income 
 
Annual Salary  Annual rate of base pay divided by 12  (without overtime, bonus, or 
commission) 
Monthly Salary  Monthly base pay as shown (without overtime, bonus, or commission) 
Semi-monthly Salary  Base pay rate x 24 / 12 
Bi-weekly Salary  Base pay rate x 26 / 12 
Weekly Salary  Base pay rate x 52 / 12 
Hourly  Rate of Pay x # Hours worked per week x 52 / 12   
 
OTHER TYPES OF EMPLOYMENT-RELATED INCOME 
OVERTIME & BONUS 
Overtime is money paid to individuals who earn additional wages for time worked above and beyond 
the normal workday or workweek. A Bonus is money paid in addition to regular wages. Sometimes 
bonuses are paid on a regular basis throughout the year, and some employees receive a “guaranteed” 
bonus as part of an incentive plan.  
 
Overtime and Bonus income can be used to qualify if it has been received for the past two years and 
documentation submitted for the loan does not indicate this income will likely cease. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      33 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
A two-year average of bonus or overtime income must be used; periods of overtime and bonus income 
less than two years may be acceptable, provided the underwriter can justify and document in writing the 
reason for using the income for qualifying purposes. Note: ‘projected’ bonus income must also be 
verified in writing by the employer and scheduled to begin within 60 days of loan closing.  
 
An earnings trend must be established and documented for overtime and bonus income. If either type 
of income shows a continual decline, a sound rationalization must be documented in writing for 
including the income when qualifying the applicant; the applicant will be qualified using the lower 
amount. A period of more than two years must be used in calculating the average overtime and bonus 
income if the income varies significantly from year to year. 
 
TIPS/GRATUITY 
Tips or gratuity income is compensation received in addition to the employee’s straight salary or hourly 
wage. This type of income can be used to qualify if it is established and expected to continue. 
 
COMMISSION INCOME 
Verification of Commission Income:  
•  A minimum history of 2 years of commission income is recommended; however, commission 
income that has been received for 12 to 24 months may be considered as acceptable income, 
as long as there are positive factors to reasonably offset the shorter income history.  
•  One of the following must be obtained to document commission income:  
  a completed Request for Verification of Employment (Form 1005 or Form 1005(S)), OR  
o
  The borrower’s recent paystub and IRS W-2 forms covering the most recent two-year 
o
period 
 
If the income is declining/has declined, the applicant will be qualified using the lower amount. 
 
AUTO ALLOWANCE 
The full amount of an automobile allowance received for at least the last two consecutive years may be 
included as income and the lease or financing expenditure must be included as a debt in the calculation 
of the debt-to-income ratio.  
 
HOUSING/PARSONAGE INCOME   
A housing or parsonage allowance may be considered qualifying income if there is documentation that 
it has been received for the most recent 12 months and the allowance is likely to continue for the next 
three years. The housing allowance may be added to income but may not be used to offset the monthly 
housing payment. 
 
PART-TIME/SEASONAL/SECONDARY 
Part-time or secondary income may be used to qualify if it can be documented that the applicant has 
worked the part-time job uninterrupted for the past two years, and is expected to continue. Verification 
of part-time or second-job income must be supported by IRS W-2 forms. If a borrower who has 
historically been employed on a part-time basis indicates that he or she will now be working full-time, 
written confirmation must be obtained from the borrower's employer.  
 
Occasionally, an applicant who has less than a 2-year history of receiving income from part-time or 
multiple-job employment may need that income to qualify for the mortgage. There is flexibility of 
accepting less than a 2-year history, but no less than a 12-month history for a borrower if there is a 
strong likelihood that the borrower will continue to receive that income and the lender develops an 
average monthly income for the part-time or multiple jobs.  
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      34 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
Situations in which a shorter history of receiving income from a part-time job may be acceptable include 
those in which there are two borrowers, one who has always been a full-time employee and one who 
had recently returned to work on a part-time basis; those in which a full-time employee took on a 
second, part-time job to offset the loss of income from overtime pay that was no longer available from 
his or her primary source of employment; etc. 
 
When a borrower relies on the income from a second job to qualify for a mortgage, it should be 
determined if there has been any change in the borrower's overall employment status that might 
jeopardize the continuance of income from the second job. For example, if a borrower recently 
accepted a new primary job, but arranged to continue working at his or her old job as a second job, the 
borrower would have a history of receiving income from what is now considered a second-job, but there 
would be no history of his or her ability to handle two jobs on a continuing basis. For that reason, the 
income from this second job would not be acceptable to use in qualifying the borrower. 
 
Seasonal, part-time or second job income (including seasonal unemployment compensation) can be 
considered as stable income if the borrower has worked in the same job (or line of seasonal work) for 
the past two years and the borrower's employer indicates that there is a reasonable expectation that 
the borrower will be rehired for the next season. Examples of borrowers who have seasonal jobs 
include outdoor laborers (landscapers, construction workers, etc.), income tax preparers, supplemental 
department store personnel who work during the Christmas shopping period or another holiday period, 
etc. Seasonal unemployment compensation should not be used to qualify the borrower unless it is 
appropriately documented, clearly associated with seasonal layoffs, expected to recur and reported on 
the borrower's federal income tax returns.  
For qualifying purposes, “part-time” income refers to employment taken to supplement the applicant’s 
income from regular employment; part-time employment is not a primary job and it is worked less than 
40 hours. 
 
TEMPORARY LEAVES OF ABSENCE (INCLUDING MATERNITY LEAVE) 
Temporary leave from an employer may encompass various circumstances (e.g. family and medical, 
short-term disability, maternity, other temporary leaves with or without pay). Temporary leave is 
generally short in duration. The period of time that borrower is on temporary leave may be determined 
by various factors such as applicable law, employer policies and short-term insurance policy and/or 
benefit terms. Leave ceases being considered temporary when the borrower does not intend to return 
to the current employer or does not have a commitment from the employer to return to employment.  
 
During a temporary leave, a borrower’s income may be reduced and/or completely interrupted. The 
lender must determine that during and after the temporary leave the borrower has capacity to repay the 
HELOC and all other monthly obligations.  
 
Determining qualifying income and borrower capacity to meet obligations while on temporary leave:  
•  For borrowers returning to their current employer prior to the first home equity payment due 
date: 
  The lender may use for qualifying income the borrower’s gross monthly income amount 
o
that will be received upon the borrower’s return to their current employer.  
•  For borrowers returning to their current employer after the first payment due date the lender 
must determine the income amount that will be received upon the borrower’s return to their 
current employer. The lender must take into account any temporary reductions in income when 
determining qualifying income, as follows: 
  The lender may use for qualifying income the Borrower’s gross monthly income amount 
o
being received during the temporary leave. In the event that the income has been 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      35 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
reduced or interrupted, the lender may use for qualifying income the monthly reduced 
amount (this amount may be zero) being received during the temporary leave combined 
with the partial or complete income supplement up to the amount of the income 
reduction. 
  The total qualifying income must not exceed the gross monthly income that will be 
o
received upon the borrower’s return to current employer.  
  Assets that are required for the transaction, e.g., closing costs, financing costs, may not 
o
be considered as available assets to supplement the income.  
 
Documentation Requirements 
The following documents must be retained in the loan file:  
•  Verification of the Borrower’s pre-leave income and employment  
•  Documentation from the current employer confirming the borrower’s statutory right to return 
to work, or the employer’s commitment to permit the borrower to return to work. The 
confirmation date of return, and the borrower’s post leave employment and income.  
•  Written statement signed by the borrower confirming that the borrower will return to their 
current employer stating the confirmation date of return that has been agreed upon between 
the borrower and the employer.  
 
In addition, the following documentation is required for borrowers returning to the current employer 
after the first mortgage payment due date:  
•  Documentation evidencing amount, duration, and consistency of all temporary leave income 
sources being used to qualify the borrower, e.g., short-term disability benefits or insurance, 
sick leave benefits, temporarily reduced income from employer, that are being received 
during the temporary leave  
•  All available liquid assets used to supplement the reduced income for the duration of the 
temporary leave must meet requirements of and be verified. 
 
RESTRICTED STOCK (RS) AND RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS (RSU)  
Employers increasingly include RS and RSU as a component of employee compensation. RS are 
grants of company shares which represent equity interest in the company. RSU are grants valued in 
terms of company shares that do not represent equity interest in the company. Both RS and RSU are 
subject to a restriction period during which recipients are not permitted access to granted shares until 
vesting requirements are met. Vesting requirements are based on varying criteria but the most common 
types are:  
•  Performance-based (e.g., a certain percentage of total granted shares vest based on individual 
or corporate performance), and  
•  Time-based (e.g., a certain percentage of total granted shares vest after a pre-determined 
period of employment)  
 
Documentation Requirements  
RS and RSU may be used to qualify the Borrower for the Mortgage, provided the following 
requirements have been met: 
 
Income Type  Stable Monthly Income  Documentation Requirements 
Requirements 
RS and RSU subject to  History of receipt:  All of the following: 
performance-based  •  Two years, consecutive  •  YTD paystub(s) documenting 
vesting provisions  •  To be considered for history  all YTD earnings, including 
of receipt, RS and RSU used  payout(s) of RS or RSU, W-2 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      36 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Income Type  Stable Monthly Income  Documentation Requirements 
Requirements 
for qualifying must have  forms for the most recent two 
vested and been distributed  calendar years and a 10-
to the Borrower from their  dayprior to close verbal 
current employer, without  verification of employment. 
restriction  Income verification obtained 
  through a third-party 
Continuance: Must be likely to  verification service provider is 
continue for at least the next three  not permitted. 
years. The underwriter is not required  Or all of the following: 
to obtain documentation to verify  •  Written VOE documenting all 
income continuance, absent any  YTD earnings (including 
knowledge, information or  payout(s) of RS or RSU) as 
documentation that the income is no  well as earnings for the most 
longer being received or is likely to  recent two calendar years, 
cease.  and a 10-day prior to close 
  verbal verification of 
employment. Income 
verification obtained through 
a third-party verification 
service provider is not 
permitted. 
 
Additional documentation 
requirements applicable to all 
documentation levels: 
•  Evidence the stock is publicly 
traded 
•  RS and/or RSU agreement 
•  Most recent vested 
schedule(s) detailing past and 
future vesting 
•  Evidence of receipt of 
previous year(s) payout(s) of 
RS/RSU (e.g., year-end 
paystub, employee-provided 
statement paired with a 
brokerage or bank statement 
showing transfer of shares or 
funds) that must, at a 
minimum, include: 
  Date(s) of the 
o
payout(s) 
The number of vested shares or its 
cash equivalent distributed to the 
Borrower (pre-tax) 
 
Calculation 
SUBJECT  REQUIREMENT AND GUIDANCE 
RS and RSU subject to performance-based  Based on the form in which vested RS or RSU are 
vesting provisions  distributed to the borrower (i.e., as shares or its cash 
equivalent), the seller must use the applicable method(s) 
below to calculate the monthly income: 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      37 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
SUBJECT  REQUIREMENT AND GUIDANCE 
RS or RSU distributed as shares: 
 
Multiply the 52-week average stock price as of the 
application received date by the total number of vested 
shares distributed (pre-tax) to the borrower in the past two 
years, then divide by 24. 
 
(e.g. if 200 vested shares were distributed (pre-tax) in the 
past two years and the 52-week average stock price as of 
the application received date is $10, multiply 200 x $10 
then divide by 24=$83.33 monthly income) 
 
RS or RSU distributed as cash equivalent: 
 
Use the total dollar amount distributed (pre-tax) from the 
cash equivalent of vested shares in the past two years 
and divide by 24.  
 
Refer below for more information about fluctuating 
earnings. 
 
RS and RSU subject to time-based vesting  Based on the form in which vested RS or RSU are 
provisions  distributed to the Borrower (i.e., as shares or its cash 
equivalent), the Seller must use the applicable method(s) 
below to calculate the monthly income: 
 
RS or RSU distributed as shares: 
 
Multiply the 52-week average stock price as of the 
Application Received Date by the number of vested 
shares distributed (pre-tax) to the Borrower in the past 
year, then divide by 12.  
 
(e.g., if 50 vested shares were distributed (pre-tax) in the 
past year and the 52-week average stock price as of the 
Application Received Date is $10, multiply 50 x $10 then 
divide by $12=$41.67 monthly income) 
 
RS or RSU distributed as cash equivalent: 
 
Use the total dollar amount distributed (pre-tax) from the 
cash equivalent of vested shares in the past year and 
divide by 12. 
 
Refer below for more information about fluctuating 
earnings.  
 
 
Analysis of Income Fluctuation and Stability  
The determination of stability for RS and RSU income used to qualify must include analysis of 
changes in the company's stock price as well as past and future distributions detailed in a vesting 
schedule. If the YTD earnings are consistent with the previous year(s) earnings or trending upward, 
then the underwriter must use the applicable calculation method(s) below to determine the monthly 
income. If the earnings are not consistent (i.e., the value of vested shares distributed decreases 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      38 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
substantially year-over-year), additional analysis is required and additional documentation may be 
necessary to determine income stability and develop an accurate calculation of qualifying income.  
 
Eligible Asset 
Stock with limitations on its accessibility (e.g., restricted stock which has not vested and been 
distributed to the recipient) is not eligible source of borrower funds and may not be used for closing 
costs. 
 
SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME 
GENERAL 
A consumer with a 25 percent or greater ownership interest in a business is considered self-employed.  
The following factors must be analyzed before approving a home equity transaction for a self-employed 
borrower:  
•  The stability of the borrower’s income,  
•  The location and nature of the borrower’s business,  
•  The demand for the product or service offered by the business,  
•  The financial strength of the business, and  
•  The ability of the business to continue generating and distributing sufficient income to enable 
the borrower to make the payments on the requested mortgage. 
 
There are four basic types of business structures. They include: 
•  Sole proprietorships; 
•  Corporations; 
•  Limited liability or “S” corporations; and 
•  Partnerships. 
 
INCOME OR LOSS REPORTED ON SCHEDULE K-1 (IRS FORMS 1065 OR 1120S) 
Business income reported on Schedule K-1 may be used to qualify only when the borrower has a 
documented history of receiving cash distributions of income from the business consistent with the level 
of business income being used to qualify.  
Caution must be used when including income that the borrower draws from the borrower’s partnership 
or S corporation as qualifying income. Ordinary income, net rental real estate income, and other net 
rental income reported on Schedule K-1 may be included in the borrower’s cash flow provided:  
•  The borrower can document ownership share (may use Schedule K-1), and  
•  The business has adequate liquidity (e.g. working capital) to support the withdrawal of earnings. 
A written evaluation of the business income must be retained in the file. 
 
If…  Then… 
The Schedule K-1 reflects a documented,  No further documentation of access to the income 
stable history of receiving cash  or adequate business liquidity is required. The 
distributions of income from the business  Schedule K-1 income may then be included in the 
consistent with the level of business  borrower’s cash flow. 
income being used to qualify, 
The Schedule K-1 does not reflect a  The lender must confirm the following to include the 
documented, stable history of receiving  income in the borrower’s cash flow:  
cash distributions of income from the    The business has adequate liquidity 
o
business consistent with the level of  (working capital) to support the 
business income being used to qualify,  withdrawal of earnings. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      39 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
If…  Then… 
The borrower has a two-year history of  These payments can be added to the borrower’s 
receiving “guaranteed payments to the  cash flow 
partner” from a partnership or an LLC, 
The underwriter must consider the type of business 
Business tax returns are required, 
structure and analyze the business returns 
 
DOCUMENTATION 
Self-employed documentation requirements differ based on the loan amount: 
•  Most recent one to two years of signed individual federal income tax returns—IRS Form 1040. 
•  Tax transcript(s) obtained directly from the IRS may be used in lieu of signed tax returns.  
•  Most recent one to two years of IRS Schedule K-1. 
•  Most recent one to two years of signed business federal income tax returns (IRS Form 1065 or 
IRS Form 1120S), unless the requirements to waive business tax returns have been met. 
•  All applicants whose income is verified with tax returns, must sign IRS Form 4506 – Request for 
Copy of Tax Return – (or 4506-C Request for Transcript of Tax Returns) for the individual, and if 
applicable, for the business.  
•  See Tax Transcript Section for additional requirements 
 
If an applicant has submitted required income documentation with an existing or pending First 
Mortgage and/or Commercial Relationship, the underwriter may relay on the following: 
 
First Mortgage Relationships: 
•  Residential first mortgage derived income may be used; AND 
•  IDM may be used as repository for income docs/assets. 
 
ANALYZING TAX RETURNS FOR A PARTNERSHIP, LLC AND S CORPORATION 
Evaluating Business Income for Partnership, LLC and S Corporation 
When the borrower has 25% or more ownership interest in the business and business tax returns 
are required, the underwriter must perform a business cash flow analysis and evaluate the overall 
financial position of the borrower’s business to determine whether:  
•  Income is stable and consistent, and 
•  Sales and earnings trends are positive. 
 
If the business does not meet these standards listed above, business income cannot be used to 
qualify the borrower.  
 
Borrower’s Proportionate Share of Income/Loss for a Partnership and LLC 
The borrower’s proportionate share of income or loss is based on the borrower’s partnership 
percentage of Ending Capital in the business as shown on the IRS Form 1065, Schedule K-1. Only 
the borrower’s proportionate share of the business income or loss after making the adjustment to 
the business cash flow can be used when qualifying the borrower for the mortgage loan. 
 
Borrower’s Proportionate Share of Income or Loss for an S Corporation 
The borrower’s proportionate share of income or loss is based on the borrower’s (shareholder) 
percentage of stock ownership in the business for the tax year as shown on IRS Form 1120S, 
Schedule K-1. The cash flow analysis should consider only borrower’s proportionate share of the 
business income (or loss), taking into account any adjustments to the business income that are 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      40 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
discussed below. Business income may only be used to qualify the borrower if the lender obtains 
documentation verifying that: 
•  The borrower has ownership of the income (Schedule K-1 may be used to document 
ownership share) 
 
Alternatively, the lender can obtain documentation verifying that:  
•  The business has adequate liquidity (e.g. working capital) to support the withdrawal of 
earnings.  
  A written evaluation of the business income must be retained in the mortgage file.  
o
 
Earnings from a Corporation (1120) 
It is only required to document access to business income if the borrower is less than 100% owner 
of the business (i.e. 1120) and the income is not reporting on the borrower’s personal tax returns.  
 
ADJUSTMENTS TO BUSINESS CASH FLOW 
Partnership, LLC and S Corporation 
Items that can be added back to the business cash flow include depreciation, depletion, 
amortization, casualty losses, and other losses that are not consistent and recurring.  The following 
items should be subtracted from the business cash flow: 
•  Meals and entertainment exclusion, 
•  Other reported income that is not consistent and recurring, and 
•  The total amount of obligations on mortgages or notes that are payable in less than one 
year. 
 
These adjustments are not required for lines of credit or if there is evidence that these obligations 
roll over regularly and/or the business has sufficient liquid assets to cover them. 
 
Income from Partnerships, LLCs, Estates, and Trusts 
Income from partnerships, LLCs, estates, or trusts can only be considered if the lender obtains 
documentation verifying that: 
•  The borrower has ownership of the income (Schedule K-1 may be used to document 
ownership share), and  
•  The income was actually distributed to the borrower.  
 
Alternatively, the lender can obtain documentation verifying that:  
•  The borrower has access to the income through a partnership agreement, LLC operating 
agreement, or other documentation that the lender determines is appropriate, unless the 
borrower(s) own 100% of the business in which case confirmation of access to the income is 
not required; and  
•  The business has adequate liquidity (e.g. working capital) to support the withdrawal of 
earnings. A written evaluation of the business income must be retained in the file. 
 
OWNERSHIP IN THE BUSINESS < 25% 
For borrowers who have less than 25% ownership of a partnership, S corporation, or limited liability 
company (LLC), ordinary income, net rental real estate income, and other net rental income reported on 
IRS Form 1065 or IRS Form 1120S, Schedule K-1 may be used in qualifying the borrower provided:  
•  The borrower can document ownership share (may use Schedule K-1),  
•  The borrower can document access to the income, and  
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      41 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  The business has adequate liquidity (e.g. working capital) to support the withdrawal of earnings. 
A written evaluation of the business income must be retained in the file. 
 
If…  Then… 
The Schedule K-1 reflects a documented,  No further documentation of access to the income 
stable history of receiving cash  or adequate business liquidity is required. The 
distributions of income from the business  Schedule K-1 income may then be included in the 
consistent with the level of business  borrower’s cash flow. 
income being used to qualify, 
The Schedule K-1 does not reflect a  The lender must confirm the following to include the 
documented, stable history of receiving  income in the borrower’s cash flow:  
cash distributions of income from the    The business has adequate liquidity 
o
business consistent with the level of  (working capital) to support the 
business income being used to qualify,  withdrawal of earnings. 
The borrower has a two-year history of  These payments can be added to the borrower’s 
receiving “guaranteed payments to the  cash flow 
partner” from a partnership or an LLC, 
The underwriter must consider the type of business 
Business tax returns are required, 
structure and analyze the business returns 
 
An exception to the two-year requirement of receiving “guaranteed payments to the partner” is if a 
borrower has recently acquired nominal ownership in a professional services partnership (for example, 
a medical practice or a law firm) after having an established employment history with the partnership. In 
this situation, the lender may rely upon the borrower’s guaranteed compensation. This must be 
evidenced by the borrower’s partnership agreement and further supported by evidence of current year-
to-date income.  
 
Documentation Requirements – For Schedule K-1 documentation requirements, the borrower must 
provide the most recent two years of signed individual federal income tax returns and the most recent 
two years of IRS Schedule K-1. If the K1 does not reflect a documented stable history of receiving cash 
distributions of income, two years business returns will be required to demonstrate the business has 
adequate liquidity (e.g. working capital) to support the withdrawal of earnings. 
 
SECONDARY SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME  
It is not required to account for self-employment loss when the borrower is qualified using only income 
that is not derived from self-employment and self-employment is a secondary and separate source of 
income (or loss). Examples of income not derived from self-employment include salary and retirement 
income. 
 
RENTAL INCOME- 
CALCULATIONG MONTHLY NET RENTAL INCOME OR LOSS 
When the subject property is a 2-4-unit principal residence, you must calculate rental income as 
follows: 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      42 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Rental Income From the Subject Property 
Does Borrower Have 
History of Receiving  Calculate Monthly Net Rental 
Documentation Requirements 
Rental Income from  Income (or Loss) 
Property? 
Document the rental cash flow by  Analyze the borrower’s cash 
obtaining a copy of the most recent year  flow and calculate the net rental 
Yes 
filed tax return, pages 1 and 2 and  income (or loss) per month from 
Schedule E   the returns  
The gross rental income from 
the property is equal to the 
lesser of the market rent 
  established by the appraiser or 
the current rent based on the 
Leases can only be used if a property is 
existing lease agreement(s). 
No  not listed on Schedule E because it was 
Net rental income equals 75% 
acquired subsequent to filing the tax 
of the gross rent; the remaining 
return). 
25% of the gross rent is 
absorbed by vacancy losses 
and ongoing maintenance 
expenses. 
 
When the borrower owns additional property that is rented, calculate the monthly net rental income (or 
loss) in accordance with the following table: 
Rental Income from Property Other Than the Security Property 
Does Borrower Have 
History of Receiving  Calculating Monthly Net Rental 
Documentation Requirements  
Rental Income from  Income (or Loss)  
Property?  
Document the rental cash flow by  Analyze the borrower’s cash flow 
obtaining a copy of the most recent  and calculate the net rental 
Yes 
year filed tax return, pages 1 and 2  income (or loss) per month from 
and Schedule E   the returns  
Net rental income is 75% of the 
Obtain copies of current lease 
gross rent from the lease 
agreements (only if a property is not 
agreements, with the remaining 
No  listed on Schedule E because it was 
25% being absorbed by vacancy 
acquired subsequent to filing the tax 
losses and ongoing maintenance 
return).  
expenses.  
 
Treatment of the Income (or Expense) 
The amount of monthly net rental income (or loss) that is considered as part of the borrower’s total 
monthly income (or expenses) and its treatment in the calculation of the borrower’s total debt-to-
income ratio will vary depending on whether the borrower occupies the rental property as his or her 
principal residence. 
 
If the net rental income (or loss) relates to the borrower’s principal residence: 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      43 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  The monthly net rental income (as defined above) must be added to the borrower’s total 
monthly income. 
•  Any net rental loss must be added to the borrower’s total monthly obligations. 
•  The full amount of the mortgage payment (PITIA) must be included in the borrower’s total 
monthly obligations when calculating the debt-to-income ratio. 
 
If the net rental (or loss) relates to a property other than the borrower’s principal residence: 
•  The monthly net rental income (as defined above, but excluding the full amount of the 
related mortgage payment) must be added to the borrower’s total monthly income. 
•  Any monthly net rental loss must be added to the borrower’s total monthly obligations. 
•  The full PITIA for the rental property is factored into the amount of the net rental income (or 
loss), therefore, it should not be counted as a monthly obligation. 
•  The full PITIA for the borrower’s principal residence must be counted as a monthly 
obligation. 
 
When Schedule E is used to calculate rental income, the full PITIA must be accounted for. Any 
listed depreciation, interest, taxes, insurance, or HOA expenses will be added back to the 
borrower’s cash flow. Please refer to the Fannie Mae Rental Income Worksheets Forms 1037 or 
1038 or the Freddie Mac Rental Income Worksheet Form 92. 
 
When the borrower is using rental income to qualify for the mortgage the entire PITIA of the 
property must be considered when evaluating property cash flow regardless of the obligated party. 
 
OTHER NON-EMPLOYMENT INCOME 
GENERAL 
If the applicant intends to use income from other non-employed/non-self-employed sources to qualify, 
the income may be considered stable to the extent that it is consistent and it can be established that 
income appears to be sustainable for a specified period of time or the loan term based on the required 
documentation. Factors that should be considered in determining the likelihood of consistent payments 
include, but are not limited to the following: 
•  Whether the payments are received pursuant to a written agreement, court decree, or law; 
•  The length of time the payments have been received; 
•  Eligibility criteria governing the continued receipt of the income, such as age of dependents or 
accumulation of assets. 
 
DOCUMENTATION 
If other non-employed income is used to qualify, the applicant must have a history of receiving the 
income regularly, and demonstrate that the income appears to be sustainable, and/or will continue for a 
specific period of time or the loan term. In order to verify the duration in which the applicant has 
received, and will continue to receive other non-employed income, the following documentation may be 
obtained: 
•  Most recent award letter, pension statement, court order/agreement, asset statement from 
which the income is generated, notes receivable, agreements etc. confirming the amount, 
frequency, duration of payment, and what if any portion is tax free, or; 
•  Tax returns with all schedules from previous two years, most recent 1098 and/or most recent 
1099, or; 
•  Most recent bank statements showing receipt of income. 
 
Evidence in the file shall demonstrate that the applicant income was considered to the extent that it is 
reliably and regularly received. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      44 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
 
ALIMONY/CHILD SUPPORT/SEPARATE MAINTENANCE 
In order for alimony or child support to be considered as acceptable, stable income, the applicant must 
have received the income for at least 12 months and it must be expected to continue for at least 3 
years as specified by the court order, final divorce decree, legal separation agreement, voluntary 
payment agreement or an attorney’s letter specifying the individuals and issues.  
 
 Child support may be “grossed up” by 25% to account for tax deductions.  
 
We will accept as verification that alimony or child support will continue to be paid. A photocopy of the 
divorce decree, or separation agreement if the divorce is not final, that provides for the payment of 
alimony or child support and states the amount of the award and the period of time over which it will be 
received; any other type of written legal agreement or court decree that describes the payment terms 
for the alimony or child support; or any application of state law that requires alimony, child support, or 
maintenance payments may be used as income. 
 
FOSTER CARE 
Income that a borrower receives from a state or county-sponsored organization for providing temporary 
care for one or more children may be considered as acceptable stable income as long as the borrower 
has a 2-year history of providing foster-care services and is likely, in the foreseeable future, to continue 
to provide such services at a level that supports the amount of income needed for qualifying for the 
loan. If a borrower has not been receiving this type of income for 2 full years, we may nevertheless 
count the income as stable income, as long as the borrower has at least a 12-month history of providing 
foster care services and this income does not represent more than 30% of the total gross income that is 
used to qualify the borrower for the mortgage. 
 
Foster-care income may be verified by: 
•  Letters from the organizations providing the income,  
•  Copies of the borrower's signed federal income tax returns that were filed with the IRS, or  
•  Copies of the borrower's deposit slips or bank statements that confirm the regular deposit of    
the payments. 
 
CAPITAL GAINS INCOME  
Income received from a capital gain is generally a one-time transaction; therefore, it should not usually 
be considered as part of the borrower’s stable monthly income. However, if the borrower needs to rely 
on the income from capital gains to qualify for the mortgage, copies of the borrower’s signed federal 
income tax returns that were filed with the IRS for the past two years, including the related Capital 
Gains and Losses (Schedule D to IRS Form 1040) must be obtained. When the borrower’s tax returns 
show that he or she has realized capital gains for the last two years, develop an average income from 
capital gains and use that amount as part of the borrower’s qualifying income, as long as the borrower 
provides evidence that he or she owns additional property or assets that can be sold if extra income is 
needed to make future mortgage payments.  
 
The sale of real estate is not acceptable to be used as qualifying income unless documentation can 
establish that the borrower does this for a living. 
 
UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS 
Unemployment benefits, such as those received by seasonal workers, may be considered as 
acceptable income if the income is properly documented, has been received for the past 2 years and is 
predictable and likely to continue (as discussed for seasonal unemployment compensation). Copies of 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      45 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
the borrower's signed federal income tax returns that were filed with the IRS for the past 2 years should 
be used to establish a history of the receipt of these benefits. 
 
DISABILITY/WORKER’S COMPENSATION 
Disability benefit payments should be treated as acceptable income unless the terms of the disability 
policy specifically limit the stability or continuity of the benefit payments. Benefits that have a defined 
expiration date must have a remaining term of at least three years from the date of the mortgage 
application in order to be used for qualifying the borrower. For example, if a borrower is receiving 
disability benefits that are scheduled to be discontinued when he or she reaches a certain age and the 
borrower will reach that age within three years of loan closing, the lender should not count the disability 
benefit as stable income. When a borrower is currently receiving short-term disability payments that will 
decrease to a lesser amount within the next three years because they are being converted to long-term 
benefits, the lender must use the amount of the long-term payments in determining the borrower’s 
stable income. 
 
Generally, long-term disability will not have defined expiration date and must be expected to continue. 
The requirement for re-evaluation of benefits is not considered a defined expiration date. 
 
Verification of long-term disability must be documented with one of the following:  
•  Obtain a copy of the borrower’s disability policy or benefits statement from the benefits payer 
(insurance company, employer, or other qualified disinterested party) to determine: 
  The borrower’s current eligibility for the disability benefits, and  
o
  The amount and frequency of the disability payments, and  
o
  If there is contractually established termination or modification date  
o
•  Social Security income for long term disability will not have defined expiration date and must be 
expected to continue. Verification of income must be documented with one of the following: 
  A copy of the Social Security Administration’s award letter; or  
o
  Copies of signed federal income tax returns; or  
o
  Social Security Benefit Statement (Form SSA-1099); or  
o
  Copies of the borrower’s recent bank statements. 
o
 
NOTES RECEIVABLE  
Payments on notes receivable must continue for at least 3 years from the date of the mortgage 
application in order to be considered as acceptable stable income. We require a copy of the note to 
establish the amount and length of payment. Borrowers must provide evidence the funds have been 
received for the past 12 months. Acceptable evidence includes deposit slips, copies of signed federal 
income tax returns that were filed with the IRS or copies of the borrower's bank statements that show 
consistent deposits of these funds. 
 
RETIREMENT, GOVERNMENT, AND PENSION INCOME 
Individual retirement account (such as 401K or 403b), or annuity income is similar to pension and social 
security income except that it may not be payable for life. A copy of the most recent updated individual 
retirement account or annuity renewal statement showing the effective date, amount, frequency, and 
duration of the benefit payments showing the income will continue for at least 3 years must be 
obtained. 
Document regular and continued receipt of the income as verified by 
•  Letters from the organizations providing the income, 
•  Copies of retirement award letters, 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      46 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Copies of retirement award letters, 
•  IRS W-2 or 1099 forms, or 
•  Proof of current receipt 
 
If retirement income is paid in the form of a distribution from a 401(k), IRA, or Keogh retirement 
account, determine whether the income is expected to continue for at least three years after the date of 
the mortgage application. In addition  
•  The borrower must have unrestricted access without penalty to the accounts; and 
•  If the assets are in the form of stocks, bonds, or mutual funds, 70% of the value (remaining after 
any applicable costs for the subject transaction) must be used to determine the number of 
distributions remaining to account for the volatile nature of these assets.  
 
If the retirement income is newly established, verification of current receipt is not required. Document 
the finalized terms of the newly established income including, but not limited to, the source, type, 
effective date of income commencement, payment frequency and pre-determined payment amount with 
the benefit verification letter, notice of award letter or other equivalent documentation from the payor 
that provides and establishes these terms. The income must commence prior to or on the first 
Mortgage payment due date. 
 
All retirement income must be likely to continue for at least the next three years 
 
Distributions from retirement accounts recognized by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) (e.g., 401[k], 
IRA) that are not subject to penalty (e.g., early withdrawal penalty) may be considered stable monthly 
qualifying income. Evidence of the income source, type, distribution frequency, distribution amount(s), 
current receipt (as applicable) and history of receipt (as applicable), must be documented. 
 
If distributions are being taken in accordance with certain IRS rules, such as the Required Minimum 
Distributions (RMD) rule (i.e., excise tax penalty applies if distributions are not taken), and evidence of 
current receipt of the required minimum distribution amount is obtained, history of receipt is not required 
for the income to be considered stable. 
 
Due to the multiple variables inherent with distributions from retirement accounts, including, but not 
limited to, fixed and fluctuating income amounts, the history of receipt necessary to justify a stable 
monthly qualifying income amount may vary. This may include a range of history from zero to 24 
months, depending upon the individual circumstances. As with all income, the underwriter (or “it” can be 
acceptable) must determine that the source and amount of the income are stable. Factors that the 
underwriter must consider when determining that the income used to qualify the Borrower is stable, and 
when determining the history of receipt necessary to justify a stable monthly qualifying income amount 
include, but are not limited to, the following: 
•  Frequency and regularity of receipt of the distributions 
•  Length of time the distributions have been taken and whether or not they establish a stable 
pattern of receipt over a given period of time. For example, consider whether or not the 
distributions are fixed amounts occurring with regular frequency or are fluctuating amounts 
occurring with or without regular frequency. For fixed amounts occurring with regular frequency, 
a lesser history of receipt may be needed in order to determine the amount and stability of the 
qualifying income than would be needed for fluctuating amounts. For fluctuating amounts, it may 
be necessary to obtain a longer history of receipt in order to determine the amount and stability 
of the qualifying income while taking into consideration whether or not the overall payments are 
similar when viewed year over year or with another similar measure, such as quarter over 
quarter. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      47 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Rules governing distributions (e.g., IRS rules governing exceptions to early withdrawal penalties 
and Required Minimum Distributions (RMD), employer retirement plan rules and designs 
governing scheduled distribution terms). Certain rules may provide support for the frequency 
and regularity of receipt as well as continued receipt, thereby enabling a lesser amount of 
history to justify a stable monthly qualifying income amount. 
 
Documentation Requirements: 
•  Most recent retirement account statement(s), documentation from financial institution holding 
retirement account that verifies regularly scheduled distribution arrangements, 1099(s) and/or 
other equivalent documentation showing income source, type, distribution frequency, 
distribution amounts and history of receipt (as applicable), and 
•  Bank statement(s) or other equivalent documentation evidencing current receipt (as applicable), 
and  
•  Evidence of sufficient assets to support the qualifying income 
 
If the retirement distributions are not scheduled monthly payments (e.g., annual, semi-annual, 
quarterly), the most recent distribution verified through a retirement account statement, 1099 and/or 
other equivalent documentation, as applicable, is sufficient in lieu of current receipt; however, 
verification of receipt of multiple distributions may be necessary to determine frequency of distributions, 
history of receipt and amount of stable monthly qualifying income.  Sufficient assets remaining after 
closing must be documented to support continuance of the retirement account distributions as income 
for at least the next three years. 
 
A written rationale explaining the analysis used to determine the qualifying income must be provided, 
regardless of the underwriting path.  
 
ANNUITY INCOME 
Annuity income is similar to pension and Social Security income except that it may not be payable for 
life. A copy of the most recent updated annuity renewal statement showing the effective date, amount, 
frequency, and duration of the benefit payments showing income will continue for at least three years 
must be obtained. 
 
SOCIAL SECURITY INCOME 
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) may be considered as qualifying income that has a reasonable 
expectation of continuance unless there is evidence that the benefits will not continue. Pending or 
current re-evaluation of medical eligibility for benefit payments is not considered an indication that the 
insurance and/or benefit payment will not continue. Social Security benefits received on behalf of 
another beneficiary or under another’s Social Security account or work record may not necessarily 
continue for three years. In these instances, documentation of continuance will be required.  
 
MILITARY/VA BENEFITS 
Military personnel may be entitled to different types of pay in addition to their base pay. The following 
may be considered stable income provided there is documentation verifying the income will continue for 
at least three years: 
•  Flight Pay 
•  Hazardous Duty Pay 
•  Rations 
•  Clothing Allowance 
•  Housing Allowance 
  
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      48 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Education benefits used to offset education expenses are not acceptable. 
 
Obtain a copy of the borrower’s last Leave and Earnings Statement (LES) to verify allotments, 
allowances, estimated time in service, and the amount of net and gross pay. Also, obtain and verify the 
following information from the borrower’s latest Leave and Earnings Statement (LES): 
•  Military Rank 
•  Social Security Number 
•  Military Address 
•  Length of active service to date 
 
The tax-free income from housing (BAQ), rations, uniforms, food, flight pay, etc., can be used as 
income to qualify for the loan. Grossing up of this income is subject to standard. The LES statement 
must show at least 12 months remaining for time in service, otherwise the tax-free income cannot be 
used to qualify for the loan. As long as there is at least 12 months remaining before the borrower’s “out 
date” (as verified on the LES), a verbal verification of employment is not needed. 
 
INTEREST & DIVIDENDS 
Average interest and dividend income received for the last 2 years may be used to calculate the 
qualifying income. Before calculating the projected interest or dividend income, the underwriter will 
need to subtract any funds that are derived from these sources, or are required for the cash investment. 
Asset statements must be provided to support a three-year continuance. Asset statements must be 
provided to support a three-year continuance. 
 
ROYALTY PAYMENTS 
If the borrower needs to rely on income from royalty payments to qualify for the mortgage, the following 
documentation must be provided: 
•  Royalty contact, agreement, or statement confirming amount, frequency, and duration of the 
income; and  
•  Borrower’s most recent signed federal income tax return, including the related IRS Form 1040, 
Schedule E.  
 
Documented evidence showing that the borrower has received royalty payments for at least 12 months 
and will continue to receive them for at least three years after the date of the mortgage application is 
required in order to use the payments as qualifying income, and documentation of receipt of income. 
 
TRUST INCOME 
Income from a trust may be used if constant payments will continue for at least the first three years and 
is properly documented via a copy of the Trust Certificate or other trustee statement confirming the 
amount of the trust, frequency of distribution and duration of payments.  
 
Trust account funds may be used for the required cash investment if the applicant provides adequate 
documentation that the withdrawal of funds will not negatively affect income. 
 
EMPLOYMENT-RELATED ASSETS AS QUALIFYING INCOME 
All of the following loan parameters must be met in order for employment-related assets to be used as 
qualifying income: 
Parameter  Transaction Requirements 
Maximum LTV/CLTV/HCLTV  70% for borrowers < age 62 
80% for borrower = > age 62 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      49 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Minimum Credit Score  620 credit score 
Loan Purpose  Cash-out refinance only 
Number of units  1-4 units 
Income Calculation/Payout  Divide “Net Documented Assets” by amortization term of the 
Stream  loan (in months) 
Asset Ownership  Borrower(s) must match asset ownership 
 
Asset Requirements 
Assets used for monthly income stream must be owned individually by the borrower, or the co-
owner of the asset must be a co-borrower of the subject property. Assets must be liquid and 
available to the borrower with no penalty. 
•  Non-self-employed severance package or non-self-employed lump sum retirement package 
(i.e., a lump sum distribution) must be documented with a distribution letter from the 
employer (1099R) and deposited to a verified asset account. 
•  401(k) or IRA, SEP, KEOGH retirement accounts, the borrower must have unrestricted 
access to the funds in the accounts and can only use the account if distribution is not 
already set up or the distribution amount is not enough to qualify. The account and is 
composition must be documented with the most recent monthly, quarterly or annual 
statement. 
•  If a penalty would apply to a distribution of funds form the account made at the time of 
calculation, then the amount of such penalty applicable to a complete distribution from the 
account (after costs for the transaction) must be subtracted to determine the income stream 
from these assets. 
•  If the employment–related assets are in the form of stocks, bonds, and mutual funds, 70% of 
the value (remaining after costs for the transaction and consideration of any penalty) must 
be used to determine the income stream to account for the volatile nature of these assets. 
•  A borrower shall only be considered to have unrestricted access to a 401(k) or IRA, SEP, 
Keogh retirement account if the borrower has, as of the time of calculation, the unqualified 
and unlimited right to request a distribution of all funds in the account (regardless of any 
possible tax withholding or applicable penalty applied to such distribution). 
 
Ineligible Assets 
Non-employment related assets (e.g. stock options, non-vested restricted stock, lawsuits, lottery 
winnings, sale of real estate, inheritance, divorce proceeds, etc.) 
 
Net Documented Assets 
“Net documented assets” are equal to the sum of eligible assets minus: 
•  the amount of the penalty that would apply if the account was completely distributed at the 
time of calculation; 
•  the amount of funds used for down payment, closing costs, and required reserves; 
•  30% of the remaining value of any stocks, bonds, or mutual fund assets (after the 
calculation in (b)). 
 
Example: Calculation of net Documented Assets 
IRA (made up of stocks and mutual funds)  $500,000 
Minus 10% of $500,000 ($5000,000 x .10)   
(assumes the borrower is not yet 59 ½ years of age at the time this income is   
being calculated; therefore, it is subject to a 10% penalty for early distribution.  (-) $50,000 
This penalty must be levied against any cash being withdrawn for closing the 
transaction as well as the remaining funds used to calculate the income stream.) 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      50 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
Total eligible documented assets  (=) $450,000 
Minus funds required for closing (down payment, closing costs, reserves)  (-) $100,000 
(a) Subtotal  (=) $350,000 
Minus 30% of $350,000 ($350,000 x .30)  (-) $105,000 
(assumes funds are in the form of stocks, bonds, and mutual funds) 
(b) Net Documented Assets  (=) $245,000 
Monthly income calculation ($245,000/360 (or applicable term of loan in   
months))  $680.56/month 
 
See Income Calculation/Payout Stream in table below 
 
NON-EMPLOYMENT-RELATED ASSETS AS QUALIFYING INCOME  
When the borrower has liquid assets that are not employment-related, the assets may be used to 
qualify the borrower if the following terms are met:  
 
Parameter  Transaction Requirements 
Maximum LTV/CLTV/HCLTV  60%  
Minimum Credit Score  680 credit score 
Occupancy  Primary Residence only 
Loan Purpose  Cash-out refinance only 
Number of units  1-2-unit properties only (3 to 4 units not eligible) 
Asset Ownership  Borrower(s) must match asset ownership 
 
Income Verification 
To determine whether the borrower qualifies for the home equity transaction, the underwriter may 
convert the borrower’s Other Financial Assets into an income stream as described in the Monthly 
Income Stream Calculation section below. 
 
The income derived from the monthly income stream calculation must be entered as “Other 
Income” on the Uniform Residential Loan Application. Other Financial Assets used in the 
conversion technique shall not be considered as assets available for closing costs or reserves. 
 
Interest, dividends, and capital gains from Other Financial Assets (reported on the borrower’s tax 
return) cannot be used as additional income. 
 
Reserves 
The borrower’s minimum reserve requirements may not be satisfied using any of the Other 
Financial Assets that are being converted into an income stream. 
 
Asset Requirements 
•  Other Financial Assets must be owned individually by the borrower, or the co-owner of the 
assets must be a co-borrower of the HELOCs. 
•  Other Financial Assets used for the calculation of the monthly income stream must be liquid 
and available to the borrower with no penalty. 
•  If the Other Financial Assets are in the form of stock, bonds, mutual funds, or U.S. savings 
bonds, 70% of the value (remaining after costs for the transaction) must be used to 
determine the income stream to account for the volatile nature of these assets. 
•  If assets are in the form of demand deposit account, savings account or certificate of 
deposit, 100% of the value may be used to determine the income stream. 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      51 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Net documented assets are equal to: 
  The sum of eligible documented Other Financial Assets minus any funds that will be 
o
used for closing or required reserves, and 
  Minus 30% of the remaining value of any stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or U.S. 
o
savings bonds assets (after the calculation in (a)). 
 
Example: 
Checking and savings accounts $40,000  
IRA - made up of stocks and mutual funds $500,000  
Funds required for closing - Down payment, closing costs, reserves (- $100,000)  
 
Remaining IRA assets ($500,000 - $60,000 used at closing)  
$440,000  
Minus 30% 132,000  
$308,000 Net documented assets 
 
Minimum Asset Amount 
The minimum amount of the Other Financial Assets required is as follows:  
•  The lesser of one- and one-half times the original UPB or $500,000.00.  
 
Minimum Seasoning of Assets 
The minimum seasoning of the Other Financial Assets is 24 months  
 
Eligible Asset Types 
Assets Eligible as Other Financial Assets:  
•  The same eligible liquid financial assets that may be used for the borrower’s reserves, which 
includes: o Checking and savings accounts;  
  Investments in stocks, bonds, mutual funds, CD’s, money market funds, and trust 
o
accounts; and  
  Cash value of a vested life insurance policy  
o
•  Funds from the sale of investment properties.  
 
Assets Ineligible as Other Financial Assets:  
Assets that are ineligible as borrower’s reserves, which includes:  
•  Funds that have not been vested;  
•  Funds that cannot be withdrawn under circumstances other than the account owner’s 
retirement, employment termination, or death;  
•  Stock held in an unlisted corporation;  
•  Non-vested stock options and non-vested restricted stock;  
•  Personal unsecured loans; and  
•  Cash proceeds from a cash-out refinance transaction on the subject property  
 
Monthly Income Stream Calculation  
Convert the borrower’s net documented assets by the amortization terms of the Mortgage (in 
months).  
 
Example of Calculation:  
•  Present Value: $1,000,000  
•  30-year Mortgage: 360  
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      52 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
•  Income: $2777.77  
 
TAX EXEMPT INCOME 
When needed for qualification, if income is verified to be nontaxable and its tax-exempt status are likely to 
continue, the following requirements must be met to gross up the income: 
•  Income must be from a non-taxable source such as social security, retirement payments, child 
support, disability, workers compensation benefits, or certain public assistance payments 
•  A copy of the complete federal individual tax return for the most recent one year, or other 
documentation evidencing the income, or a portion of, is tax exempt must be provided. 
•  The non-taxable portion of the income may be grossed up by using a calculation of either 
  25% of the tax-exempt portion of the income 
o
  The current federal and state income tax withholding tables 
o
 
COLLATERAL & APPRAISAL GUIDELINES 
INTRODUCTION 
An essential part of the underwriting process is an accurate appraisal of the real property comprising the 
loan security. The appraisal report summarizes the valuation process for the property; and establishes 
whether the property’s value is adequate security for the proposed loan.  The appraisal report must convey 
a thoroughly documented and well-supported impartial estimate of value as of a precise date. Appraisals 
prepared for Flagstar must be of high quality, nondiscriminatory, and prepared in accordance with all 
relevant professional standards and regulatory agency requirements. Appraisers must be independent of 
any influences – financial or otherwise – that would in any way detract from the objectivity of their reports. 
 
Use of appraisals or other valuations must conform to Flagstar’s appraisal policies and regulatory 
requirements. 
 
COLLATERAL EVALUATION 
The appraisal report/evaluation forms are designed to provide a concise format for presenting both the 
appraiser’s description of the subject property and the valuation analysis that leads to the opinion of 
market value. All forms and documentation must be completed in a manner that will clearly reflect the 
thoroughness of the appraiser’s investigation and analysis, and provide the rationale for the opinion of 
market value.  
 
There are a number of ways to determine that the collateral is acceptable for the transaction. The forms 
vary depending on the underwriting method and the type of property. Collateral valuation is determined 
as described in the following sections. 
 
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 
On-site inspections completed by licensed or certified appraisers, statistical database modeling, or 
other appropriate methods approved by the Chief Residential Appraisal Officer as long as they comply 
with all regulations. The value will be equal to the lesser of the appraised value or purchase price. The 
value for properties purchased within the prior 120 days will be equal to the lesser of the appraised 
value or purchase price plus the documented cost of improvements, if applicable.    
 
ORDERING THE APPRAISAL 
When an appraisal is ordered for a residential property, the appraiser should be provided with all 
information that may affect the appraiser’s estimate of value or marketability. The appraisal order must 
include the name and phone number of a contact who can provide the appraiser with necessary 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      53 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
information, and access to the property. The person ordering the appraisal cannot also be involved in 
underwriting the loan. 
 
AGE OF APPRAISALS AND OTHER VALUATIONS 
Appraisal reports and other valuations are good for up to 120 days preceding the date of the note. If the 
appraisal or other valuation is more than 120 days old at the time of application, the current appraised 
value will be used for the property valuation. Properties purchased within 120 days of application will 
use the lesser of the purchase price or appraised value to calculate LTV/CLTV/HCLTV, measured from 
the date on which the property was purchased to the disbursement date of the new mortgage loan. 
 
STANDARD APPRAISAL GUIDELINES 
Standard appraisal requirements establish the value based on a thorough evaluation of both the interior 
and exterior of the subject property. It includes a quantitative sales comparison analysis and requires 
the assignment of a dollar value to reflect the market’s reaction to any features of a comparable sale 
that differs from those of the subject property. 
 
Appraisals must generally be completed ‘As Is”. 
 
The appraiser must supply the following exhibits with all appraisal reports: 
•  Street map to scale that shows the location of the subject property and all comparable sales 
used 
•  Exterior building sketch of the improvements that indicates the dimensions 
•  Gross living area calculations must be shown 
•  Exterior Photographs of the subject property that show the front, back, sides, street and any 
amenity or obsolescence that adds or detracts value, as well as a picture of the front of each 
comparable sale 
•  Interior Photographs of the subject property that show the main living area, kitchen, all 
bathrooms, and amenity or obsolescence that adds or detracts value 
•  Condominium projects general information as it relates to the project itself such as 
management, number of phases and completion, common elements, etc. 
•  Any other data that is necessary to provide an adequately supported opinion of value 
 
 
APPRAISAL FORMS 
The forms required to document appraisal information, which is listed below, is dependent upon the 
property type, loan amount, and CLTV. 
•  Form 1004/URAR – Uniform Residential Appraisal Report: Used for interior inspections on 1-4-
unit properties, PUD’s and site condominiums. 
•  Form 1073/Individual Condominium Unit Appraisal Report (interior inspections) 
•  Evaluation – integrated valuation model or collateral valuation report analysis. 
 
VALUATION METHODS 
Charted below are the guidelines for determination of property values: 
 Appraisal Type  Loan Amount 
≤ $250,000 
3rd Party Collateral Evaluation  (see below for cases requiring a 
full appraisal for ≤ $250,000) 
1004/1073, as applicable  > $250,000 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      54 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Standalone Home Equity Underwriting Guidelines 
 
A full appraisal must be ordered through LoanTrac and be completed by a Flagstar approved Appraisal 
Management Company (AMC), regardless of AIR Compliant status in lieu of an evaluation in the 
following situations: 
•  Adequate subject property and/or comparable data is not available; 
•  Properties with any of the following characteristics: 
  Recently remodeled or extensively renovated 
o
  Properties with excess acreage (15+ acres) 
o
  Unique design or amenities (berm/dome/log home or atypical amenities such as private 
o
tennis court, multiple outbuildings, etc.). 
 
USE OF APPRAISAL FOR A SUBSEQUENT TRANSACTION  
The use of an origination appraisal for a subsequent transaction is acceptable if the following 
requirements are met:  
•  The appraisal report must not be more than 12 months old on the note date of the subsequent 
transaction. If the appraisal report is greater than 4 months old on the date of the note and 
mortgage, then an appraisal update is required. Age of Appraisal and Appraisal Update 
Requirements, for requirements for completing an appraisal update, must be met. 
•  The property has not undergone any significant remodeling, renovation, or deterioration to the 
extent that the improvement or deterioration of the property would materially affect the market 
value of the subject property. 
•  The borrower and the lender/client must be the same on the original and subsequent 
transaction. 
•  Appraisal Review must review appraisal. 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines                      55 of 55     01/11/2023 
Return to Top 

NEW PAGE