FHA 203(k) Rehabilitation Mortgage 
RESTRICTED-ELIGIBILITY PROGRAM 
Customers must be Direct Endorsed Correspondents and must be specifically approved to participate in this 
program. Contact your Account Executive regarding participation in Flagstar Bank’s 203(k) programs. 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE 
Maximum  Minimum Credit 
Property type  Underwriting Engine & Required Response 
LTV 1  Score 
1 to 4 Unit 
110%  FHA Total Mortgage Scorecard 
PUD 
580  DU – Approve or LPA – Accept 
Refer responses will be manually underwritten 
Warrantable Condo  100% 
1.  The maximum LTV for each loan will be determined by the 203(k) Calculator available on the HUD website.  
 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
The FHA 203(k) program allows borrowers to obtain a single mortgage loan, at a long-term fixed or adjustable 
rate, to finance both the acquisition and rehabilitation (minimum $5,000 of renovation work) of the property. To 
provide funds for the rehabilitation, the mortgage amount is based on the projected value of the property with 
the work completed, taking into account the cost of the work. All rehabilitation work must start within 30 days of 
closing and be completed within six months of closing. 
 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
FIXED RATE MORTGAGES 
Traditional and jumbo loan amounts are separated into distinct products: 
•  FHA 203(k) 10-year 
•  FHA 203(k) 15-year 
•  FHA 203(k) 20-year 
•  FHA 203(k) 25-year 
•  FHA 203(k) 30-year 
 
ADJUSTABLE RATE MORTGAGES 
Traditional and jumbo loan amounts are combined into the same product: 
•  FHA 203(k) 5/1 ARM 
 
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  U.S. citizens 
•  Permanent resident aliens 
•  Non-occupant co-borrowers 
INELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  Non-permanent resident aliens 
•  Trusts 
•  Investors 
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  1 to 4 Unit property 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 7  Document #5814 
Return to Top    06/03/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA 203(k) Rehabilitation Mortgage 
  Reconstructing a structure that has been or will be demolished is eligible provided the complete 
o
existing foundation system is not affected and will still be used 
•  Planned unit development 
•  Condominium 
  Refer to Property Standards section below 
o
 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTY 
•  Cooperative units 
•  Manufactured homes 
•  Homes never completed 
•  Homes where final Certificate of Occupancy was issued within the past 12 months 
•  Mixed-use properties 
 
LOAN AMOUNTS 
MINIMUM 
None 
MAXIMUM 
Maximum loan amount is determined by the 203(k) Calculator available on the HUD website 
INTERESTED PARTY CONTRIBUTIONS 
Maximum 6% 
TEMPORARY BUYDOWNS 
Not eligible 
SUBORDINATE FINANCING 
Not eligible 
CREDIT ALERT INTERACTIVE VOICE RESPONSE SYSTEM (CAIVRS) 
All borrowers must be screened using the Credit Alert Interactive Voice Response System (CAIVRS). FHA will 
not insure a loan if the borrower is currently delinquent on any unpaid federal debt, or has had a claim paid 
within the previous three years. Prior to accessing CAIVRS you will need each applicant’s Social Security 
Number. CAIVRS must be accessed through FHA Connection. This is a web-based system that requires prior 
approval through HUD. 
QUALIFYING RATE 
Note Rate 
QUALIFYING RATIOS 
Refer to the Ratios section of our FHA Underwriting Guidelines. 
 
PROPERTY GUIDELINES 
APPRAISAL STANDARDS 
All loans must have an appraisal obtained from a Flagstar approved appraisal management company. 
Please refer to Appraisal Management Companies, Doc. #4903, for more information. 
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 7  Document #5814 
Return to Top    06/03/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA 203(k) Rehabilitation Mortgage 
•  Full appraisal (Fannie Mae 1004/Freddie Mac 70 – or equivalent forms for condominiums or two-
unit properties) is required. 
•  The appraiser must provide the after-improved value of the property (after all rehabilitation work is 
completed). 
•  The appraiser must also provide the “as-is” value of the property (prior to any rehabilitation work) 
when required by the HUD Handbook (e.g., certain refinance transactions and when necessary to 
comply with FHA’s property flipping guidelines). 
•  Program may be used for discretionary repairs and/or improvements that may not have been 
identified in course of pre-purchase inspection or appraisal. Appraiser must be provided with 
information regarding proposed rehabilitation or improvements and all cost estimates so that an 
after-improved value can be estimated. Description of proposed repairs and/or improvement must 
be included in appraisal report as well as contractor's cost estimate. 
•  Appraiser to indicate in reconciliation section of appraisal report an after-improved value subject to 
completion of proposed repairs and/or improvements, based on Specification of Repairs. 
PROPERTY STANDARDS: 
•  Condominium projects are restricted, must have been approved by FHA and rehabilitation is subject 
to the following conditions: 
  Maximum mortgage cannot exceed 100% of after-improved value. 
o
  Rehabilitation is limited to the interior of unit only. Mortgage proceeds may not be used for 
o
rehabilitation of exteriors or other areas that are the responsibility of condominium association. 
•  Refer to HUD Handbook as well as the HUD website for additional information. 
 
203(K) ELIGIBLE WORK ITEMS (ALLOWED PROPERTY REPAIRS) 
The types of improvements using FHA 203(k) financing include: 
•  Structural alterations and reconstruction. 
•  Modernization and improvements to the home's function. 
•  Elimination of health and safety hazards. 
•  Changes that improve appearance and eliminate obsolescence. 
•  Reconditioning/replacing plumbing; installing well and/or septic system. 
•  Adding or replacing roofing, gutters, and downspouts. 
•  Adding or replacing floors and/or floor treatments. 
•  Major landscape work and site improvements. 
•  Enhancing accessibility for a disabled person. 
•  Making energy conservation improvements. 
•  An existing multi-unit dwelling could be decreased to a one-unit dwelling. 
•  An existing house on another site moved onto mortgaged property. 
•  HUD requires that property financed under this program meet certain basic energy efficiency and 
structural standards. However, luxury items and improvements that do not become a permanent 
part of the property are not eligible to be included in the 203(k) loan. 
CONSULTANT GUIDELINES 
DE Correspondent must exercise due diligence with regard to the full scope of the 203(k) consultant's services. 
Consultant must enter into a written agreement with the borrower that completely explains what services will be 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 7  Document #5814 
Return to Top    06/03/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA 203(k) Rehabilitation Mortgage 
rendered and the fees charged. Neither HUD nor Flagstar will be responsible to the consultant for fees owed 
by the borrower. 
CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS 
•  Mortgagor self-help arrangements are not permitted. 
•  Requirements for selecting the contractor: 
  Contractors must have been licensed a minimum of three years. If state does not license 
o
contractors, then a minimum of three years comparable experience and references are necessary. 
  Cost estimate(s) must clearly state nature and type of repair and cost for completion of work 
o
item. Copy of contractor's cost estimate(s) and the Homeowner/Contractor Agreement must be 
placed in the insuring binder. Contractor must finish work in accordance with written estimate, 
Homeowner/Contractor Agreement and any approved change order. Rehabilitation Construction 
Period begins when loan is closed. 
 
CONTINGENCY RESERVE 
STRUCTURE < 30 YEARS OLD  MINIMUM  MAXIMUM 
Required when evidence of termite damage  10%  20% 
Discretionary  No Minimum  20% 
STRUCTURE ≥ 30 YEARS OLD   MINIMUM  MAXIMUM 
Required  10%  20% 
Required when utilities are not operable as 
15%  20% 
referenced in the Work Write-Up 
 
CLOSE OUT OF REHABILITATION ESCROW ACCOUNT 
All rehabilitation work must be completed within six months of closing. Any unspent funds remaining after final 
work-item payment is made must be applied to mortgage principal. An executed Mortgagor’s Letter of 
Satisfactory Completion must be provided. 
DRAWS 
FHA 203(k) loans are eligible for up to five draws (four plus the final draw). Consultants selected from the FHA 
203(k) Consultant Roster may perform inspections on DE Correspondent’s behalf, but it remains DE 
Correspondent’s responsibility to assure that inspections are completed in a quality and timely manner. Copies 
of all required permits must be submitted prior to the release of the first draw. 
 
INITIAL & SUBSEQUENT DRAWS 
•  All draws must comply with FHA guidelines and procedures 
UNDERWRITING 
•  All loan applications will be underwritten to FHA’s Total Mortgage Scorecard and Flagstar current 
guidelines. Refer to the HUD Handbook and Flagstar’s FHA Underwriting Guidelines. 
•  Non-traditional, alternative credit and no credit score loans are now eligible and will follow the FHA 
Handbook 4000.1 
•  Loans for borrowers with non-traditional credit are permissible; a credit score of 999 should be entered 
for those borrowers. 
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 7  Document #5814 
Return to Top    06/03/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA 203(k) Rehabilitation Mortgage 
•  All work must be completed within six months of closing. 
•  No portion of the project may be completed by a relative of the borrower(s). Contractors/builders must 
be unrelated to the borrower(s). 
•  Required Documentation: 
  203(k) Borrower’s Acknowledgement Form, HUD-92700-A, must be completed prior to closing 
o
the 203(k) loan. This form notifies the borrower(s) of their responsibilities as they relate to the 
rehabilitation of the subject property. 
  Loan Underwriting and Transmittal Summary Form, HUD-92900-LT, is used to qualify the 
o
borrower. 
  Rehabilitation Loan Agreement requires four pieces: 
o
  The loan amount 
  Total rehabilitation cost 
  Number of months to complete project from date of agreement 
  Completion date 
  The work write-up must show that, when property is completed, it will meet FHA's minimum 
o
property standards or, if more stringent, local codes 
•  The 203(k) Calculator available on the HUD website must be used to calculate the mortgage amount. 
The appraiser must provide an after-improved and an as-is value since both of those amounts are used to 
calculate the maximum mortgage. If borrower has owned the property for less than a year, the Original 
Acquisition Cost must be used to determine the maximum mortgage amount. The Original Acquisition 
Cost is defined as the lowest sales price within the last year. 
•  ADP Codes and required FHA Connection screen information: 
ADP Codes  Description 
702  203(k) Improvements/First Lien Fixed Rate 
730  203(k) Improvements/First Lien Adjustable Rate 
804  203(k) Condominium Improvements/First Lien Fixed Rate 
815  203(k) Condominium Improvements/First Lien Adjustable Rate 
 
  If mortgagee had originally begun processing case as a purchase mortgage without repairs, 
o
mortgagee should update existing case data in Case Number Assignment screen, changing 
ADP Code to a valid 203(k) ADP Code and Construction Code to Substantial Rehabilitation. 
 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE PREMIUM (MIP) 
Upfront and monthly mortgage insurance premiums will be calculated according to the policies outlined in the 
HUD Handbook. 
FEES 
SUPPLEMENTAL ORIGINATION FEE 
When mortgage involves advances and partial disbursements of rehab escrow account, lender may collect 
supplemental origination fee from borrower. This fee compensates lender for additional cost of 
disbursements and inspections of work. Fee is 1.5% of portion of mortgage allocated to rehabilitation or 
$350, whichever is greater. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  5 of 7  Document #5814 
Return to Top    06/03/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA 203(k) Rehabilitation Mortgage 
TITLE UPDATE FEE 
To protect validity of mortgage position from mechanics liens on property, reasonable fees charged by the 
title company may be included as an allowable cost of rehabilitation. Where mortgage position is protected 
and is not in jeopardy, this fee may not apply. Borrowers may wish to obtain lien protection, but the 
Borrower must pay the fees where such lien protection is not required to ensure the validity of the security 
instrument. 
INDEPENDENT CONSULTANT FEES 
Consultant must enter into a written agreement with borrower that completely explains what services 
consultant will perform for borrower and the fees charged. Fees charged by the consultant can be included 
in the mortgage. Such fees include (refer to the HUD Handbook regarding the eligible amount of fees that 
may be charged): 
•  Financeable fees:  •  Non-financeable fees: 
  Feasibility study    Change order fee 
o o
  Work write-up    Re-inspection fee 
o o
  Draw inspections    Mileage fee 
o o
 
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
Available in the following states with geographic restrictions. States not listed are available without restrictions. 
State  Restriction 
Puerto Rico  Not eligible 
 
ADJUSTABLE RATE DETAILS 
Interest Rate 
Initial: 1% up/down; Periodic: 1% up/down; Lifetime: 5% up 
Adjustment Caps 
Margin  See Price Indication Sheet 
Index  1-Year Constant Maturity Treasury (CMT) 
Interest Rate Floor  The interest rate floor is equal to the Margin 
5/1 ARM: Initial interest rate change date will occur within 60 to 66 months, depending on the 
Change Dates 
first payment date. See table below. Interest rate will adjust every 12 months thereafter. 
Conversion Option  None 
Assumption  Subject to conditions, fees and rate adjustment 
Negative Amortization  None 
 
Initial Interest Rate Change Dates 2 
First Payment Date  Initial Change Date 3 
Jan. 1, Feb. 1, Mar. 1  April 1 
Apr. 1, May 1, Jun. 1  July 1 
Jul. 1, Aug. 1, Sep. 1  October 1 
Oct. 1, Nov. 1, Dec. 1  January 1 
2.  The initial interest rate change dates are also published on the daily Price Indication Sheet. 
3.  The change date is always the first day of the month. 
V. Product Guidelines  6 of 7  Document #5814 
Return to Top    06/03/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  FHA 203(k) Rehabilitation Mortgage 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Closing documents must not be ordered through Flagstar’s Web Based Closing Docs (WBCD) service. DE 
Correspondents must order 203(k) closing documents from their own source, and must not use WBCD. 
Document packages ordered through WBCD will be incomplete and will cause loans to be ineligible for 
purchase by Flagstar. 
FHA CONNECTION CASE CLOSEOUT REQUIREMENTS  
FHA Connection case closeout must occur within six months of the closing date. The DE Correspondent must 
electronically certify closeout via FHA Connection and is not required to forward closeout documents to FHA. 
As with all FHA case binders, the originator must retain the file, either in hard copy or electronic format, for two 
years following the endorsement of mortgage. Proper close-out means that the mortgagee has certified that it 
has reviewed and verified for accuracy the following without limitations: mortgagor's acknowledgement of 
satisfactory completion, evidence of release of lien(s), mortgagee's inspection report(s), change orders, 
mortgagee accounting of the escrow funds, and record of disbursements. 
 
 
V. Product Guidelines  7 of 7  Document #5814 
Return to Top    06/03/2022 

NEW PAGE