Conventional Loan Credit Overlays 
TOPIC  POLICY OVERLAY 
The following Agency products are not offered by Flagstar Bank 
•  Fannie Mae Homestyle Energy Mortgage 
•  Freddie Mac Renovation and Construction products  
•  Freddie Mac GreenChoice Mortgages 
Products 
•  Freddie Mac ChoiceHome Mortgage 
•  High LTV Refinance Mortgages (currently suspended by GSEs)  
•  Fannie Mae Native American Lending Initiative (NACLI) 
•  Fannie Mae Disaster Related Limited Cash-Out Refinances 
Manual underwriting is not permitted. All loans must have an acceptable DU or LPA 
AUS 
response.  
Social Security Number  All borrowers must have a valid social security number   
At least one borrower must have a valid credit score 
Minimum Credit Scores Required regardless of DU/LPA response for the following: 
•  Second Homes 
Credit Score 
•  Investment Properties 
•  3-4 Unit Renovation loans 
•  One-Close construction loans 
Age of Assets for   Depository accounts must be dated within 45 days of the application 
Freddie Mac  Quarterly account statements must be dated within 90 days of the application 
Flagstar will not lend in condominium projects where its exposure exceeds 30% of the 
Condo Concentration 
units in projects with more than 4 units. 
Desktop Appraisal is not eligible 
Appraisals 
Freddie LPA ACE +PDR are not eligible 
A contingency reserve of 5% is required on new construction  
One-Close Construction 
Major remodels and tear downs are not eligible 
Homestyle and HomeReady- 
A 10% contingency reserve is required, regardless of occupancy or number of units 
Homestyle Renovation 
Agency options requiring income verification (paystub) after Note date to confirm 
Employment Commencing 
qualifying income are not eligible: Fannie Mae Option One and Freddie Mac Option Two 
After Note date 
referenced in their Selling Guides 
Properties located in a Coastal Barrier Resources Area (CBRA) or Otherwise Protected 
Flood Insurance 
Area (OPA) are prohibited 
Cooperatives are eligible for Fannie Mae/DU only 
Cooperative Properties  Flagstar will not lend in condominium projects where its exposure exceeds 20% of the 
units in projects 
Fannie Mae Fixed Rate/DU only 
 Manufactured homes must be double-wide/multi-width. Single-width are not eligible 
Property must be an existing manufactured home on a permanent foundation and 
Manufactured Homes  
previously converted to real estate 
Purchase transactions will be eligible for subsequent purchases only. New construction 
manufactured home or manufactured home dealer purchases are ineligible 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  1 of 3  01/12/2023 
Return to Top     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Conventional Loan Credit Overlays 
TOPIC  POLICY OVERLAY 
Refinance of interim construction financing of a manufactured home are ineligible 
Manufactured Home may not be located in a Condominium, or Cooperative or project 
or have leasehold interests 
Not eligible for Single Financed Mortgage Insurance 
MH Advantage properties are not eligible 
Manufactured home accessory unit must be recorded on title as real property prior to 
closing or at time of purchase. 
Manufactured Home as  An appraisal is required to verify compliance with all manufactured home standards, 
Accessory Units  regardless of DU/LPA response offerings for an appraisal waiver 
The addition of or improvements to a manufactured home accessory unit are not 
eligible under the Homestyle Renovation product 
Mortgage Insurance must be Borrower Paid Monthly, Single Financed and Lender Paid.  
Mortgage Insurance 
Unless permitted per the product, reduced MI options are not permitted 
Construction to Permanent  Financing to pay-off interim construction loans are eligible with Fannie Mae/DU only 
Financing  Cash-out transactions are not permitted 
Flagstar Bank will not approve or close more than 10 residential loans to any one 
borrower with an aggregate loan amount total of no more than $4,000,000 
•  When determining if the limit has been met, new loan submissions for a 
Multiple Loans to the Same  borrower must take into consideration any of that borrower’s outstanding loans 
Borrower  with Flagstar Bank that are:    
  non-closed,   
o
  closed and currently serviced by Flagstar Bank or    
o
  closed but the servicing rights have been sold within the last 24 months  
o
If borrower applies for an owner-occupied transaction after closing on a previous 
owner-occupied transaction with Flagstar on a different property in the last 12 months, 
Occupancy  
the new transaction will be ineligible. This guideline will not apply if the previous 
property has been sold or refinanced as a non-owner-occupied residence 
Not allowed on cash-out refinance 
Power of Attorney must be transaction specific unless it is a Military Durable POA 
Power of Attorney   Document may not be eSigned 
 Agent must be a family member (or have a fiduciary interest when allowable 
 per Freddie Mac). All other parties are ineligible from acting as an attorney-in-fact 
Closing in Trust  An attorney opinion letter or Certificate of Trust to validate agency warranties are met  
Property Condition- Fannie  Properties must be appraised with a condition of C4 or better. Properties in C5 are 
Mae   ineligible 
Life Estates  Life Estates are ineligible 
Lava Zones – Freddie Mac   Lava Zones 1 and 2 are prohibited 
Land Trusts  Land Trusts/Community Land Trusts are not eligible 
Leaseholds  An attorney opinion letter stating agency warranties are met. 
U.S. Territories  Properties located in Guam and Puerto Rico are not eligible 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  2 of 3  01/12/2023 
Return to Top     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Conventional Loan Credit Overlays 
TOPIC  POLICY OVERLAY 
Rate and Term Proceeds-  Allowable cash back under a rate-and-terms transaction may not be used to pay off debt 
Freddie Mac   for qualification   
Special Purpose Cash-Out-  A Mortgage where the proceeds of the refinance to buy-out the equity of a co-owner is 
Freddie Mac   priced as a cash-out 
Attorney Opinions of Title are not acceptable.  
Generally, title commitments have a 90-day effective date, however a title commitment 
cannot exceed 120 days.  If the title commitment exceeds 120 days, the title insurer is 
Title Commitment  
required to provide a gap letter (good for an additional 60 days) or an updated/new title 
commitment.  Under no circumstances can a title commitment with a gap letter exceed 
180 days. 
TRID  Non-owner-occupied loans must adhere to all TRID rules. 
Buydowns  Temporary Buydowns are not allowed 
Prepayment Penalty  Prepayment Penalties are not allowed 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac requires Lenders to have a written policy governing the 
circumstances under which escrow accounts may be waived.  Flagstar policy for an 
escrow waiver is as follows:  
•  LTV must be 80% or less (CA only permitted up to 90%, see limitations below);  
•  Allowable on owner occupied and second home properties with an Accept or 
Approve from LPA/DU and a minimum representative credit score of 620. No assets 
other than those required by LPA/DU need to be verified; 
Escrow Waivers 
•  Allowable on investment properties with an Accept or Approve from LPA/DU and a 
minimum representative credit score of 700. LPA/DU required assets, in addition to 
one-year of taxes, must be verified; 
•  A pricing adjustment will be charged for all approved full escrow waivers, see rate 
sheet and/or Flagstar pricing engine for applicable LLPA. A partial waiver for 
insurance only is not subject to a pricing adjustment 
•  See guidelines for additional limitations 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac require Lenders to rep and warrant a non-U.S. citizen 
borrower is legally present in the United States. While all borrowers must document 
Non-Permanent Resident 
they are legally present in the United States with a Green Card, VISA, EAD Card, etc., any 
Aliens 
borrower with income used for qualification must be present under one of the eligible 
VISA classifications and requirements per guidelines. 
 
The Conventional Underwriting Guidelines, include but not limited to, the above referenced overlays to Fannie 
Mae or Freddie Mac Selling Guides. This document is for reference purposes and is not intended to replace 
Flagstar Bank underwriting guidelines. 
 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  3 of 3  01/12/2023 
Return to Top     

NEW PAGE