VA Underwriting Guidelines 
VA UNDERWRITING GUIDELINES 
•  VA Pamphlet 26-7 – Lenders Handbook 
•  VA Loan Guaranty Circulars 
•  VA Loan Limits 
 
OVERLAYS 
4506-C 
•  A fully executed IRS Form 4506-C must be included in all loan files.  
•  1040 transcripts are required for the following income types: 
  Self-employed 
o
  Rental income documented on Schedule E 
o
  Employed by family 
o
  When tax returns are utilized to determine qualifying income, in lieu of alternative 
o
documentation options when applicable. 
 
ASSETS 
SWEAT EQUITY 
Not allowed 
  
CLOSING 
CLOSING IN TRUST 
•  For loans closing in a trust, a Certificate of Trust, Doc. #3954 or similar form is required. For 
properties located in California, the California Trust Certificate, Doc. #3951 or similar form may 
be used. 
 
CREDIT SCORES 
MINIMUM CREDIT SCORES 
Loan  Cash-Out Refinance 1 
Purpose  Purchase 3  Cash-Out Refinance 2  IRRRL3 
   
Units  1-2 Units  3-4 Units  1-2 Units  3-4 Units  1-2 Units  3-4 Units 
 
Minimum     
Credit  580  580  580  580  580  580 
Score   
1.  VA Cash-out refinance in which borrower does not receive cash back and only paying off mortgage debt. 
2.  Borrower receives cash back and/or consolidates non-mortgage debt. 
 
DOWN PAYMENT 
•  All community second and grant programs must be Flagstar-eligible - Refer to Gift/Grant Programs, 
Doc. #5935 or Community Seconds Programs, Doc. #5932. 
•  Due to GNMA’s prohibition, the down payment may not be derived from a second mortgage on the 
property. 
 
ENERGY EFFICIENT MORTGAGES 
Ineligible 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  3 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
ESCROW HOLDBACKS 
•  Closing documents must be prepared through Flagstar’s Web-Based Closing Documents (WBCD) 
and all repair escrows for Flagstar-underwritten loans are held by Flagstar 
•  Two bids required 
  Holdback will be 1 ½ times the highest bid.  Bids may not exceed $6,666 for a maximum 
o
escrow holdback of $10,000 
 
FUNDING FEE 
Due to system constraints, the funding fee must be fully financed or fully paid at closing 
 
JOINT LOANS 
•  Due to system constraints, the following joint loans are ineligible transactions: 
  All veterans are using entitlement and one is exempt from paying the funding fee but all 
o
others are required to pay a funding fee 
  Two or more unmarried veterans are borrowers on a loan but only one is using entitlement 
o
  Two or more veterans are using entitlement but one or more of the veterans’ funding fee 
o
factors differs from the others (i.e. One veteran’s funding fee factor is 2.15% and the other 
veteran’s funding fee factor is 3.30%) 
  Borrowers are a veteran and non-veteran who is not the veteran’s spouse and the veteran is 
o
subject to paying a funding fee 
•  All veterans must occupy the property  
 
MANUFACTURED HOMES 
•  Property must be a double-wide (multi-width) manufactured home 
•  Property must be existing manufactured home on a permanent foundation and previously converted 
to real estate: 
  Purchase transaction will be eligible for subsequent purchase only 
o
  New construction manufactured home or manufactured home dealer purchases are ineligible 
o
  Refinance of interim construction financing of a manufactured home are ineligible 
o
•  Manufactured home may not be located in a Condominium, Cooperative or have leasehold interest. 
•  Manufactured homes that have been moved from their original site are ineligible. 
 
MAXIMUM LOAN AMOUNTS  
•  Maximum loan amount not to exceed $4,000,000. 
•  Minimum 600 credit score required for loan amounts exceeding the conforming limit. 
•  VA one Unit Conforming Loan Limit: 
  $647,200 for the 48 Contiguous States, District of Columbia 
o
  $970,800 for Alaska, Hawaii and US Virgin Islands  
o
•  VA loan amounts $3,000,000 and higher will require Underwriting Management review and 
signature.  
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  4 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF FLAGSTAR BANK LOANS 
Flagstar will not approve and close loans for borrowers having more than ten loans with Flagstar Bank or 
having an aggregate loan amount of $4,000,000.  The maximum number of loans and aggregate loan 
amount calculations include all of the following: 
•  Non-closed loans with Flagstar Bank and 
•  Loans that are closed and currently serviced by Flagstar Bank and 
•  Loans that were closed with Flagstar Bank but the servicing rights have been sold to another lender 
within the most recent 24 months 
 
NON-OCCUPANT CO-BORROWERS 
Not permitted 
 
POWERS OF ATTORNEY 
•  Not permitted for cash-out  
 
PROPERTY ELIGIBILITY 
INELIGIBLE 
•  Properties located in American Samoa, Guam, The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands and Puerto Rico 
 
REFINANCE TRANSACTIONS 
•  Transactions in which one veteran substitutes entitlement for another veteran are ineligible 
•  Cash-Out Refinance 
  Maximum cash-in-hand 1-4 Unit – Follow AUS 
o
 
PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES 
4605-C 
•  If the 4506-C transcripts do not match the borrower’s income and the borrower is a victim of 
taxpayer identification theft, the following conditions must be met in order to validate the borrower’s 
income: 
  Proof of identification theft as evidenced by one of the following: 
o
  Proof ID theft was reported to and received by the IRS (IRS form 14039) OR 
  Copy of notification from the IRS alerting the taxpayer to possible identification theft 
  In addition to one of the documents above, all applicable documents below must be 
o
provided: 
  W2 or 1099 transcripts which match the W2 or 1099 income shown on the 1040s 
  1099 mortgage interest must match the reported interest on Schedule A or Schedule 
E 
  1099G unemployment must match the reported amount of unemployment 
  1099 dividend and interest income must match the reported dividend and interest 
  Validation of prior tax year’s income (income for current year must be in line with 
prior years) 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  5 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
APPRAISAL 
PROPERTY ADDRESSES 
The property addresses on the appraisal, mortgage, note, flood certification and in Loantrac must be 
identical.  However, abbreviation of “Street,” “Road,” etc. is acceptable, even if “Street” or “Road” is fully 
spelled in another document. This is the only acceptable variance. 
•  Use the standardized USPS address unless the address in the legal description on the title 
commitment differs.  If the legal address differs, use the legal address 
•  Appraisers are required to state the USPS address as the property address on the first line of 
the appraisal.  If the legal address differs from the USPS address, the appraiser must reference 
the legal address in a comment on the appraisal or an addendum to the appraisal 
 
PURCHASES AND CASH-OUT REFINANCES 
•  Appraisals are ordered through WebLGY in the Veteran’s Information Portal. VA provides 
access to the portal to lenders who possess a current VA Agent ID and a VA PIN. For additional 
information, refer to memo #14050 – Order VA Appraisals/Case Numbers and memo #15067 – 
VA LIN, Certificate of Eligibility, CAIVR and Appraisal Processes 
  Lenders must notify Flagstar when the appraisal has been uploaded to WebLGY by VA.  
o
Email vaappraisal@flagstar.com 
•  For lenders who have not yet received an Agent ID from VA, Flagstar will order the case 
number and appraisal.  Lenders must complete VA Case Number/Appraiser Assignment, Doc. 
#9701 and forward to fsgovlend@flagstar.com 
  If Flagstar orders the appraisal, we will upload the appraisal invoice to the paperless file, 
o
and Flagstar must be paid the appraisal fee 
 
APPRAISAL DISPUTE PROCEDURES 
•  E-mail at least three additional comps to Flagstar at vaappraisal@flagstar.com 
  Provide valid comparables, including MLS data 
o
  The SAR will review the additional comps for similarity, proximity, closing date, etc. 
o
  Upon determination that the new comps are similar to the subject property, the SAR will 
o
submit them to the appraiser for consideration. Appraiser turn time is up to five business 
days 
•  On a limited basis, we will submit the appraisal and appraiser’s rebuttal to VA for consideration 
of a higher or lower value.  VA’s turn time is ten to 15 business days 
  In the event Flagstar believes the appraised value is too high, the loan may be denied 
o
 
CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY 
A Certificate of Eligibility is required for all VA transactions.  The following information is included on a 
Certificate of Eligibility: 
•  Veteran’s full name – The veteran’s name on the Certificate of Eligibility must match the veteran’s 
name in WebLGY, Loantrac, the loan guaranty certificate and the note and mortgage 
  The following name discrepancies are the only acceptable variations: 
o
  James Everett Brown, James E. Brown, James Brown 
  William Smith Jr., William Smith, William R. Smith, William Ryan Smith, Jr., William 
Ryan Smith, William R. Smith, Jr. 
  The following name discrepancies must be resolved prior to the loan closing (this list is not 
o
all-inclusive and name discrepancies are reviewed on a case-by-case basis): 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  6 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
  Name discrepancies due to marriage (C of E shows Mary Smith, but documentation 
in Loantrac, WebLGY and/or the note and mortgage shows Mary Jones) – A copy of 
the marriage license is sufficient documentation 
  Hyphenated name discrepancies (C of E shows Bill Smith, but documentation in 
Loantrac, WebLGY and/or the note and mortgage shows Bill Smith-Jones) 
  Middle name discrepancies (C of E shows Bill John Smith, but documentation in 
Loantrac, WebLGY and/or the note and mortgage shows Bill Robert Smith) 
  First name discrepancies (C of E shows Bill Smith, but documentation in Loantrac, 
WebLGY and/or the note and mortgage shows William Smith) 
  Last name prefix discrepancies (C of E shows Bill St. Pete, but documentation in 
Loantrac, WebLGY and/or the note and mortgage shows Bill Stpete) 
 
CLOSING REQUIREMENTS 
•  Fees must be itemized on the Closing Disclosure per VA Circular 26-17-11. 
•  Interest credit allowed - Loan must close by the 7th calendar day of the month preceding the first 
payment date. 
•  All conditions must be collected and provided in the closing package 
  Down payment assistance funds are typically wired to the closing agent – Wire transfer 
o
documentation must be included in the file prior to funding or purchase 
•  Any changes to loan amount, funding fee, cash-to-close, interest rate, points, PITI, etc. must be 
reviewed by underwriter prior to closing and disbursing loan 
•  Principal reductions are required when the total of lender and/or seller credits reflected on the 
Closing Disclosure exceeds the total of the actual closing costs, pre-paid expenses and discount 
points 
•  Principal reductions are required when the borrower receives any cash back at a purchase 
transaction closing 
  Documented funds paid by the borrower outside of closing for items such as EMD or 
o
appraisal and credit report may be refunded to the borrower at closing – Document funds 
paid outside of closing with one of the following: 
  Cancelled checks 
  Bank statement showing transfer of funds – If the statement does not indicate the 
payee, a copy of the check is also required 
  Money order receipts and evidence of source of funds 
•  Principal reductions are required when the borrower is receiving more than $500 cash at closing on 
an interest rate reduction refinancing loan.   
 
NOTARY POLICY 
Refer to the Notary Policy stated in Settlement/Closing Requirements, Doc. #4601 
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
Transactions in which the realtor and the originator are the same individual are eligible. 
 
CREDIT REPORTS 
All credit reports must be imported to Loantrac, including credit reports for IRRRL transactions. 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  7 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
AGE OF CREDIT REPORTS 
•  To achieve Flagstar’s and VA’s minimum credit requirements, a new credit report may be re-
pulled after a borrower has repaired derogatory credit, and Flagstar will honor the new credit 
score. The new credit report must be imported to Loantrac 
•  The following credit report discrepancies require a new credit report: 
  Social Security number is incorrect 
o
  Last name is incorrect 
o
  Middle initial is incorrect 
o
  Misspelled first names and/or missing or incorrect suffixes (Jr./Sr.) require a new credit 
o
report unless the name variation appears in the AKA section of the credit report 
 
DE CUSTOMERS ONLY 
•  Credit report must contain Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) screening 
•  If credit report indicates a potential OFAC match, the credit report must be e-mailed to 
delegated.underwriting@flagstar.com for review by Flagstar Bank’s Secrecy Act Compliance 
Department – The loan may not close without clearance from Flagstar’s BSA Department 
(violation of this policy is a federal crime) 
 
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES 
•  Electronic signatures are permitted for all VA loan documents except the following: 
  Powers of attorney 
o
  Form SSA-89 
o
  Note and Mortgage – While VA accepts these, at this time, GNMA does not 
o
 
ESCROWS 
•  Escrow waivers not allowed  
•  Generally, property tax escrows for all new construction properties must be calculated based on the 
fully assessed property value. Obtain actual tax amounts from the local tax assessor’s office. If the 
new construction property taxes charged by the municipality will not be based on the fully improved 
property within 12 months of closing, escrows may be based on one of the following. Note:  
Regardless of assessment dates, ratios and reserves must be calculated based on the fully 
assessed property value. 
  Lot only or 
o
  A partial assessment or 
o
  Actual or estimated amount based on fully assessed value 
o
  The Closing Department will require the borrower(s) to confirm that once the property is fully 
o
assessed, they are aware of the potential escrow shortage 
•  For purchases of new and existing properties in California only, property taxes may be calculated 
using 1.25% of the purchase price or the actual tax rate 
 
ESCROW HOLDBACKS 
•  Allowed only for exterior property repairs that cannot be completed due to inclement weather 
•  Fully executed Escrow Holdback Agreement, Doc. #3655 required in closing package 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  8 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
IMMIGRATION STATUS 
•  DACA c(33) is a work status that is under a deferred action and does not provide lawful status, 
therefore, Individuals that are working under DACA authorization are not eligible 
 
INDUSTRY LINKS/FLAGSTAR LINKS AND CONTACTS 
•  VA Lender’s Handbook - VA Pamphlet 26-7  
•  VA Circulars 
•  VA Construction and Valuation 
•  VA Loan Limits 
•  VA Lender’s, Servicers and Real Estate Professionals Page 
•  VA-Approved Condos Search Engine 
•  VA-Registered Builders Search Engine 
•  VA Construction and Valuation – State Requirements 
•  WebLGY User Administration Guide 
•  DFAS My Pay – For Leave and Earnings Statements – Veteran’s PIN required 
•  Active-Duty Verbal Verifications of Active Duty 
  Army or Air Force – 888-729-2769 
o
  Marines – 888-332-7411 
o
  Navy – 888-332-7411 
o
  Civilian Defense – 800-729-3277 
o
•  DFAS– US Military Pay – Defines Abbreviations and provides Pay Charts, etc. 
•  Federal Income Tax Tables 
  IRS Federal Tax Tables 
o
•  State Income Tax Tables 
  Bank Rate – State Tax Roundup 
o
•  Flagstar Bank Government Underwriting Help Desk  
  E-Mail:  governmentuw@flagstar.com 
o
  Phone:  866-945-9872:  Select option 1 for Underwriting and option 2 for Government 
o
Underwriting 
 
INSURANCE 
HAZARD INSURANCE 
Hazard Insurance Requirements, Doc. #4602 
 
FLOOD INSURANCE 
•  Flood Insurance Requirements, Doc. #4603 
•  Eligible Flood Provider Companies- FEMA Flood Insurance Company List 
•  Private flood insurance meeting the requirements of the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform 
Act of 2012, however, all improvements, including detached structures must be insured. 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  9 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
LOAN TERM 
FIXED RATE MORTGAGES 
10, 15, 20, 25 and 30-year fixed rate mortgages  
 
ARMS 
3/1 and 5/1 CMT adjustable-rate mortgages without temporary buydowns 
 
MAXIMUM LOAN AMOUNTS 
LOAN AMOUNT RESOURCES 
•   2022 VA County Loan Limits for High Cost Counties 
•  VA Guaranty Calculation Examples 
•  VA Mortgage Calculation Worksheet – Purchase Loan Amounts ≤ $144,000, Doc. #9740 
•  VA Mortgage Calculation Worksheet – Purchase Loan Amounts > $144,000, Doc. #9741 
•  VA Mortgage Calculation Worksheet - Refinance Loan Amounts ≤ $144,000, Doc. #9742 
•  VA Mortgage Calculation Worksheet - Refinance Loan Amounts > $144,000, Doc. #9743 
 
NET TANGIBLE BENEFIT 
A net tangible benefit form must be completed when required by the state and for any Cash-Out and 
Interest Rate Reduction Refinance (IRRRL).   
 
POWERS OF ATTORNEY 
All signatures on the power of attorney must be notarized, and the power of attorney must be reviewed by 
a Flagstar underwriter. All signatures must match the signatures in the file. 
 
QUALIFIED MORTGAGES (QM) 
With the exception of the VA IRRRLs described below, VA’s Interim QM Rule classifies all VA loans as 
Safe Harbor Qualified Mortgages.  
 
IRRRLS 
IRRRLs meeting all of the following criteria are classified as Safe Harbor QMs: 
•  The note date of the refinance loan must be on or after the later of: 
•  The date that is 210 days after the due date of the first monthly payment on the mortgage being 
refinanced, and 
•  The date on which 6 consecutive full monthly payments have been made on the mortgage being 
refinanced 
•  The veteran has not been more than 30 days past due during the six months preceding the new 
loan’s closing date and 
•  The number of months to recoup the allowable fees and charges associated with the loan does 
not exceed 36 months 
  All of the following costs are included in the recoup calculation: 
o
  Fees paid on behalf of the veteran through lender credits and premium pricing 
may be excluded from the calculation if they offset allowable fees listed in 
Chapter 8 of VA Pamphlet 26-7 
  The funding fee is excluded.  
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  10 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
  Pre-paid expenses that would have been payable under the loan being 
refinanced are not included in the recoupment calculation. Examples of pre-paid 
expenses are property taxes, homeowner’s insurance premiums and HOA dues  
  If the payment increases due to a decreased loan term or conversion of an ARM to fixed 
o
rate mortgage, the Veteran cannot incur any fess, closing costs or expenses (other than 
taxes, amounts held in escrow, and fees paid under Chapter 37, e.g. VA Funding Fee) 
  The number of months to recoup is calculated using VA Net Tangible Benefit & Loan 
o
Disclosure, Doc. #9723-A and Doc. #9723-B 
 
IRRRLs not meeting the criteria above are not acceptable to VA.  
 
For additional info, refer to Interim Final Rule – Ability to Repay Standards and QM Definition 
 
REFINANCE TRANSACTIONS 
Any modified loan (Conventional, FHA, VA, USDA, etc) being paid off through a new VA refinance must 
meet the GNMA seasoning requirement with the first payment due date after the modification. 
•  The note date of the refinance loan must be on, or after the later of: 
  The date on which the borrower has made at least six-monthly payments on the loan being 
o
refinances; and 
  The date that is 210 days after the first payment due date of the loan being refinanced 
o
 
TITLE 
Effective date of title commitment must be no older than 90 days as of initial underwrite and within 120 
days of the note. 
 
ENERGY LOAN TAX ASSESSMENT PROGRAM (ELTAP) LIENS 
Not permitted 
 
UNEXPIRED RIGHTS OF REDEMPTION – ALL STATES EXCEPT ALABAMA 
•  Unless the property is located in the State of Alabama, Flagstar will not approve and/or 
purchase any loan having an unexpired right of redemption unless the purchase agreement, title 
and appraisal all show the same seller who is the original mortgagor 
  Title may show lis pendens notices from the bank or mortgagee 
o
•  Purchase contract may indicate a short sale 
•  Unexpired Rights of Redemption – Alabama Only  
  Purchase agreement, title and appraisal will be in the name of the lender and not the 
o
original mortgagor. 
  Title commitment will show one or both of the following acceptable recorded deeds: 
o
  Foreclosure from John Doe (original mortgagor) to Anybank (foreclosing lender) 
followed by the date on the deed and the recording date 
  When the foreclosing lender deeds the property to HUD, Fannie Mae, Freddie 
Mac, VA or GNMA, there will be a special warranty deed from Anybank 
(foreclosing lender) to one of the GSEs listed above followed by the date on the 
deed and the recording date 
  If the above referenced deeds are dated within the most recent 12 months, the title 
o
commitment must contain a specific exception for the unexpired right of redemption and 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  11 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
affirmatively insure, without qualification, the mortgagee (Flagstar Bank) against all 
losses arising out of the exercise of any outstanding right of redemption 
 
UNDERWRITING 
VA PRIOR APPROVAL 
The following loans require submission of the loan to VA for underwriting and approval prior to loan 
closing: 
•  Joint Loans (See Joint Loan section for definition and additional information, including joint loan 
eligibility/ineligibility) 
•  Loans to veterans who receive non-service-connected pensions 
•  Loans to veterans who have been rated incompetent by VA 
•  IRRRL loans made to refinance delinquent VA loans 
 
VA REGIONAL LOAN CENTERS 
NATIONAL CALL CENTER – 877-827-3702 
•  Select 1 if you know your party’s extension 
•  Select 2 if you are calling regarding VA funding fee 
•  Select 3 if you are a veteran or a lender obtaining or processing a VA loan 
•  Select 4 if you are a homeowner having difficulty making your mortgage payment or are in 
foreclosure, or if you are a servicer. 
•  Select 5 if you have questions about the Specially Adapted Housing Grant through VA 
•  Select 6 if you have questions about an appraisal, building ID or condominium project approval 
•  Select 7 regarding Certificate of Eligibility. Note:  Most Certificates of Eligibility can be obtained on-
line by the Veteran through eBenefits or the lender through WebLGY 
•  Select 0 if you are calling concerning other benefits such as Education, Health Care or Disability 
Benefits 
 
For options 2 and 3, calls will be answered on a nationwide basis by the next RLC representative. Calls for 
options 4 and 5 will be answered by the RLC with jurisdiction based on the caller’s area code. 
 
CLEVELAND REGIONAL LOAN CENTER 
Connecticut, Delaware, Indiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New 
York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont 
 
HOUSTON REGIONAL LOAN CENTER 
Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas 
 
ST. PAUL REGIONAL LOAN CENTER 
Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin 
 
ATLANTA REGIONAL LOAN CENTER 
Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee 
 
DENVER REGIONAL LOAN CENTER 
Alaska, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Utah, Washington, Wyoming 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  12 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  VA Underwriting Guidelines 
 
PHOENIX REGIONAL LOAN CENTER 
American Samoa, Arizona, California, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, Hawaii, 
Nevada, New Mexico 
 
ROANOKE REGIONAL LOAN CENTER 
District of Columbia, Kentucky, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia 
 
ST PAUL 
Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin 
 
ST. PETERSBURG REGIONAL LOAN CENTER 
Alabama, Florida, Mississippi, Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin Islands 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. Underwriting Guidelines  13 of 13  11/18/2022Return to Top
     

NEW PAGE