Advantage 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE1 
Maximum  Maximum  Maximum   Minimum 
Property Type 
 LTV   CLTV/HCLTV   Loan Amount   Credit Score 
1-4 Units  90%  90%  $3,000,000  680 
PUD 
85%  85%  $3,000,000  640 
Condo 
Co-op  80%  80%  $2,500,000  600 
 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – CASH-OUT REFINANCE 2 
Maximum   Maximum   Maximum   Minimum 
Property Type 
LTV   CLTV/HCLTV  Loan Amount   Credit Score 
1-4 Units  85%  85%  $3,000,000  680 
PUD 
80%  80%  $3,000,000  640 
Condo 
Co-op  75%  75%  $2,500,000  600 
 
SECOND HOME – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE1 
Maximum   Maximum   Maximum   Minimum 
Property Type 
LTV  CLTV/HCLTV   Loan Amount   Credit Score 
1-Unit  90%  90%  $3,000,000  680 
PUD 
85%  85%  $3,000,000  640 
Condo 
Co-op  80%  80%  $2,500,000  600 
 
SECOND HOME – CASH-OUT REFINANCE 2 
Maximum   Maximum   Maximum   Minimum 
Property Type 
LTV   CLTV/HCLTV  Loan Amount   Credit Score 
1-Unit  85%  85%  $3,000,000  680 
PUD 
80%  80%  $3,000,000  640 
Condo 
Co-op  75%  75%  $2,500,000  600 
 
INVESTMENT – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE1 
Maximum   Maximum   Maximum   Minimum 
Property Type 
LTV   CLTV/HCLTV  Loan Amount   Credit Score 
1-4 Units  80%  80%  $3,000,000  680 
PUD 
75%  75%  $3,000,000  640 
Condo 
Co-op  70%  70%  $2,500,000  600 
 
INVESTMENT – CASH-OUT REFINANCE 2 
Maximum   Maximum   Maximum   Minimum 
Property Type 
LTV   CLTV/HCLTV  Loan Amount   Credit Score 
1-4 Units  75%  75%  $3,000,000  680 
PUD 
70%  70%  $3,000,000  640 
Condo 
Co-op  65%  65%  $2,500,000  600 
1.  Interest Only Loans: 
o  Must follow Cash Out Refinance LTV maximums 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
o  First Time Home Buyers not allowed 
2.  Refer to Cash Out Refinance section for cash out limits. 
 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
The Advantage program offers expanded eligibility guidelines including alternative income documentation for 
qualification and reduced seasoning on major derogatory events.   
 
While the Advantage product is considered a Non-QM product and not subject to QM testing, loans are still 
subject to Federal, State and Municipal predatory testing. As such, these products may not be eligible in some 
states. 
 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
Product Name  Loan Term  Interest Only Term  ARM Disclosure 
Advantage 30-Year Fixed  30 years  n/a 
 
Advantage 30-Year Fixed (10yr IO)  30 years  10 years 
n/a 
Advantage 40-Year Fixed  40 years  n/a 
 
Advantage 40-Year Fixed (10yr IO)  40 years  10 years 
Advantage 7/6 ARM  30 years  n/a  Doc. #3384  
Advantage 7/6 ARM (10yr IO)  30 years  10 years  Doc. #3395 
Advantage 10/6 ARM   30 years  n/a  Doc. #3384  
Advantage 10/6 ARM (10yr IO)  30 years  10 years  Doc. #3397 
 
PREPAYMENT PENALTY 
Not allowed. 
 
HIGHER PRICED MORTGAGE LOAN (HPML) 
Higher Priced Mortgage Loans are allowed.  High Cost loans are not eligible. 
Refer to Compliance procedures, Doc #4801 for HPML requirements. 
 
LOAN AMOUNTS 
Minimum: $100,000 
Maximum: Refer to Eligibility Grids above 
 
CASH OUT REFINANCE 
The maximum cash back to borrower includes non-mortgage debt to be paid off.  Maximum cash out is 
determined by LTV: 
LTV  Max Cash Out 
> 55%  $500,000 
<= 55%  $750,000 
 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE 
Not required. 
 
MINIMUM CREDIT SCORE 
Refer to Eligibility Grids above.  
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
 
QUALIFYING RATE AND PAYMENT 
30 YEAR FIXED 
Note rate amortized over 30 years 
 
30 YEAR FIXED INTEREST ONLY 
Note rate amortized over 20 years 
 
40 YEAR FIXED 
Note rate amortized over 40 years 
 
40 YEAR FIXED INTEREST ONLY 
Note rate amortized over 30 years 
 
7/6 & 10/6 ARM AMORTIZING 
Greater of Note Rate or fully-indexed rate amortized over 30 years 
 
7/6 & 10/6 ARM INTEREST ONLY 
Greater of Note Rate or fully-indexed rate amortized over 20 years 
 
QUALIFYING RATIOS 
Full  Alternative 
Credit Score 
Documentation  Documentation 
680+  55%  50% 
600-679  50%  50% 
 
For qualifying debt to income ratios > 45%, borrower must meet residual income requirements per Residual 
Income Worksheet, Doc #3279. 
 
RESERVES 
Occupancy  Loan Amount  Required Verified PITIA Reserves 3,4 
≤ $1,500,000  6 months 
Primary Residence  
$1,500,001 - $3,000,000  12 months 
Second Home  All loan amounts  12 months 
Investment  All loan amounts  12months 
3.  Borrowers with multiple (more than 1) financed properties require the greater of nine (9) months or stated higher reserve amount above plus an 
additional two (2) months of reserves for each additional financed property. The two (2) months additional reserves are based on the PITI plus HOA 
fees of the other financed properties. For primary residence transactions, this requirement can be waived for borrowers who have a minimum of 12 
months’ reserves on the primary residence. 
4.  For Interest Only loans, reserves are calculated on the qualifying payment PITIA 
 
INTERESTED PARTY CONTRIBUTIONS 5 
Occupancy  CLTV/HCLTV  IPC Allowance 
≤ 80%  6% 
All Occupancy Types 
> 80%  3% 
5.  HOA dues are not allowed to be included in an interested party contribution 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
 
MINIMUM BORROWER CONTRIBUTION 
Borrower must contribute at least 3% from their own funds, regardless of LTV/CLTV.  
 
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  U.S. Citizens 
•  Permanent Resident Aliens  
•  Non-permanent Resident Aliens 
•  First-Time Homebuyers 
  Not allowed on investment properties 
o
  Interest Only not allowed 
o
 
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  1 to 4-unit properties 
•  Warrantable low, mid and high-rise condos.  Condo conversions are not allowed. 
•  Planned unit development (PUD) 
•  Co-ops meeting FNMA requirements in one of the five boroughs of New York: 
  Bronx 
o
  Brooklyn 
o
  Manhattan 
o
  Queens 
o
  Staten Island 
o
•  Modular homes 
•  Properties with up to 20 acres (total property acreage must be included on appraisal)  
  For properties >10 to 20 acres:  
o
  Maximum 35% land to value  
  No income producing attributes  
•  Earthquake Area/Seismic Study Zone 
  Earthquake insurance is required if the appraisal report or any other document (survey or title 
o
work) indicates the subject is located on or in close proximity to a fault or seismic study area. If 
no mention is made regarding earthquake exposure, insurance must not be required. 
 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  Non-warrantable condos 
•  Manufactured housing 
•  Earth homes, berm homes or basement homes  
•  Properties with square footage < 600 feet 
•  Properties purchased through Auctions 
•  Properties located in lava zones (all zones) 
 
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
NUMBER OF FINANCED PROPERTIES 
A borrower may not have more than ten (10) residential properties financed including their primary residence. 
Joint ownership in residential real estate is considered the same as total ownership and is subject to the same 
restriction.  Refer to the reserves section for minimum required reserves for borrower’s who own more than the 
subject property. 
 
APPRAISAL REQUIREMENTS 
All appraisals must be reviewed by the appraisal department. 
Loan Amount  Appraisal Requirement 
Up to  $1,500,000  One Full Appraisal 
> $1,500,000  Two Full Appraisals 
 
All loan amounts up to $1,500,000 require a secondary valuation product.  The secondary valuation must be 
within -10% tolerance of appraised value.  Acceptable products are: 
•  Consolidated Analytics CCA Product. Refer to Doc. #4910, Clear Capital & Consolidated Analytics 
Product Requirements for instructions on how to order the product. 
•  CDA or Enhanced Desk Review  
•  Field Review 
•  Second full appraisal 
 
Please note:  For all transactions, the borrower may not waive the three business day timing requirement for 
the receipt of a copy of the appraisal.    
 
UNDERWRITING 
All guidelines not addressed in this product description must meet the parameters documented in our Non-
Agency Underwriting Guidelines. 
•  Manually underwritten. Not eligible for AUS submission. 
•  Fourth Party Originations are not eligible. 
 
ASSETS 
All asset guidelines not addressed in this section must meet the parameters documented in our Non-Agency 
Underwriting Guidelines 
 
BUSINESS ASSETS 
Funds from a business account (if the Borrower is the sole owner of the company and the company’s CPA 
provides a statement indicating withdrawal of the funds will not negatively impact the business) may be 
used for down payment and reserves.  
 
CRYPTO CURRENCY 
Not eligible for funds to close or reserves. 
 
GIFT FUNDS INCLUDING GIFT OF EQUITY 
Gift funds can be used for down payment or to pay closing costs. The following parameters apply: 
•  Signed gift letter is provided, indicating: 
V. Product Guidelines  5 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
  Donor’s relationship to Borrower, (donor must be related to the Borrower); 
o
  Donor’s address, and phone number, and; 
o
  Dollar amount of gift; and 
o
  Certification it is an outright gift with no repayment required. 
o
•  Evidence of the donor’s ability to provide funds, with 60 days’ sourcing and seasoning; 
•  Evidence of transfer of funds such as a cancelled check or evidence of wire transfer from donor to 
Borrower. Documentation must also include a bank statement or other evidence from the depository 
institution that receives the funds; 
•  Borrower minimum contribution is 3% of purchase price from their own source of seasoned funds. 
 
Gifts of equity may be given provided all of the following are met: 
•  Signed gift letter is provided; and 
•  Gift of equity is listed on the HUD-1 or Closing Disclosure. 
 
Gift funds not permitted: 
•  From any donor other than a relative or Family Member of the Borrower; 
•  From any donor that is a party to the transaction, (other than a gift of equity from the 
•  seller); or 
•  From any donor that is a real estate builder, developer or in the business of owning, financing, or 
selling real estate. 
•  Investment properties 
 
LARGE DEPOSITS 
Any large deposit not consistent with the Borrower’s employment, earnings or savings profile must be fully 
explained and sourced with acceptable documentation in order to be eligible for down payment, closing 
costs, earnest money deposit and reserves. A large deposit is considered to be any amount greater than 
either: one (1) month total gross income or five (5)% of the loan amount. 
 
A signed letter of explanation from the Borrower is required in these instances and must sufficiently 
explain and source the funds. All funds used for these purposes must be from an acceptable source and 
clearly not the result of undisclosed Borrower funds, debt, or an incentive from an interested party such as 
a seller, real estate agent or developer. 
 
RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS 
When used as reserves, Retirement Accounts, including personal IRA and SEP-IRA accounts that are 
owned by the Borrower, 401(k), KEOGH, 403(b) and other IRS qualified retirement plans: 
•  Up to 60% of the vested amount, less any outstanding loans secured by account funds, may be 
counted toward Reserves, and 
•  Not more than 50% of the Borrower’s total minimum required Reserves may be from these sources 
OR; 
•  If the borrower is of retirement age, 100% of funds may be used for reserves if the account is not 
also an income source. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  6 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
CREDIT REQUIREMENTS 
All credit guidelines not addressed in this product description must meet the parameters documented in our 
Non-Agency Underwriting Guidelines 
 
MINIMUM TRADELINE REQUIREMENT 
Each individual borrower contributing income for qualifying purposes must meet the following: 
•  Minimum of three tradelines required 
  At least one tradeline has been open/active in the last 12 months 
o
  At least one tradeline has a 24 month history (open or closed) 
o
  VOR can be counted as a trade line 
o
  Authorized user accounts are not counted towards the tradeline requirements 
o
 
ALTERNATIVE CREDIT HISTORY 
Not eligible. 
 
MORTGAGE/RENT HISTORY REQUIREMENTS: 
•  The borrowers previous housing payment history is required.  The file must contain verification of 
the borrower’s 12 month payment history on the primary residence, any mortgage loans on a 
second home or investment property.   
•  For all occupancy types, no mortgage payment, including subordinate liens may be (to date of loan 
application): 0x90 in the last 12 months (NOTE:  If credit contains a housing event as listed under 
the Derogatory Credit section, the mortgage history requirement must be met, regardless of the 
seasoning of the housing event.) 
•  Mortgage payment history - the file must contain a 12 month payment history (or since origination, 
whichever is less) for all mortgages including subordinate liens.  Mortgage history must be verified 
from the credit report and other acceptable documentation, such as a Verification of Mortgage 
(VOM) completed by a financial institution. 
•  Rental payment history – if the borrower previously paid rent for their residence, then the borrowers 
rental housing payment history is required.  Payments must be documented via an institutional 
Verification of Rent (VOR), or cancelled checks/bank records.  A VOR from an individual or a 
private party landlord does not meet the requirement of verifying the borrower’s prior housing 
payment history.   
•  Borrowers who have lived in a rent-free situation are ineligible.  If a borrower has lived in a 
temporarily rent-free situation for a time period of 3 months or less, and the prior 12 months can be 
documented, this is acceptable.  (example:  borrower sold residence then lived with family rent free 
until a new home was available). 
 
DEROGATORY CREDIT: 
HOUSING EVENTS 
Housing Events do not require a seasoning period if there is a single event, but the Housing Event must 
be settled at time of closing. If there are multiple events, there is a three (3) year seasoning from the 
date of the last Housing Event.  (NOTE: The mortgage history requirements always take precedence 
over housing event seasoning.) 
•  Housing Event is defined as a Foreclosure, Short Sale, Deed in Lieu, Loan Modification, Notice 
of Default, Forbearance or 120+ Days Delinquent; 
V. Product Guidelines  7 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
•  Defaulted first and second on same property is considered one event; 
•  Housing Events that occur on the same property are considered a Single Housing Event. For 
example, Borrower’s primary residence is 120+ Days DQ, then goes into Foreclosure; 
•  Multiple Housing Events occur when two (2) or more separate properties have Housing Events 
within a three (3) year period. For example, Borrower’s primary residence goes into 
Foreclosure, as well as his or her investment property; 
•  Events include all occupancy types – Primary, 2nd Home & Investment Properties 
•  Seasoning look back is from the date of discharge or property resolution (completion date), as 
of the note date; 
•  Forbearance, or repayment plans, for any property/mortgage owned by the borrower, must be 
completed with all related financial obligations satisfactorily met AND at least three (3) 
consecutive timely payments made as of the application date of the new loan 
•  Modification look back commences at inception; 
•  Bankruptcy (“BK”) is not considered a housing event and is permitted in combination with a 
housing event; 
•  Foreclosures included in bankruptcy permitted based on BK discharge date if the borrower has 
vacated the property; and 
•  Foreclosure, Short Sale, Deed in Lieu, and Loan Modification must be settled at time of closing 
 
BANKRUPTCIES 
Bankruptcies require a 12 month seasoning period: 
•  Chapter 7 bankruptcies – Duration since bankruptcy is calculated from the discharged or 
completed date to the loan application date; 
•  Chapter 13 bankruptcies – Duration since bankruptcy is calculated from the discharged, or 
dismissed or completed date to the loan application date; and 
•  Borrowers who are under the repayment plan of a Bankruptcy are not eligible. 
 
COLLECTIONS, CHARGE-OFFS, JUDGMENTS & LIENS 
All delinquent credit that will impact title – including delinquent taxes, judgments, charge-off accounts, 
tax liens and mechanics liens must be paid off prior to or at closing.  Title must insure the lien position 
without exception.  Any item secured against the subject must be paid in full. 
 
However, collection accounts, charged-off accounts and judgments that do not impact title are not 
required to be paid off if the sum total of all derogatory accounts is $5,000 or less. When total exceeds 
$5,000, all must be paid in their entirety and all past due accounts brought current.  Medical collections 
are allowed to remain outstanding as long as the balance is less than $10,000 in aggregate. 
 
DELINQUENT CREDIT BELONGING TO EX-SPOUSE 
Delinquent credit which belongs to an ex-spouse may be excluded from the credit evaluation when all 
of the following apply: 
•  File contains a copy of the divorce decree or separation agreement which shows the derogatory 
accounts belong solely to the ex-spouse; 
•  Late payments that have occurred after the date of the divorce or separation; and 
•  If debt in question is a mortgage, evidence of title transfer prior to any delinquent debt must be 
provided and evidence of “buyout” as part of court proceedings. 
V. Product Guidelines  8 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
 
DELINQUENT CREDIT BELONGING TO CO-SIGNER  
A Co-signer is considered a Borrower on the loan, and therefore delinquent credit that belongs to a 
cosigner must be considered when evaluating the loan. 
 
WRITTEN EXPLANATIONS 
All significant derogatory events including previous housing events and bankruptcies require a written 
letter of explanation from the borrower(s). 
 
INCOME DOCUMENTATION 
Income documentation is broken down into two sections, Full Documentation (2 year traditional documentation) 
and Alternative Documentation (1 year of income documentation).  Refer to each section for requirements. 
All income guidelines not addressed in this section must meet the parameters documented in our Non-Agency 
Underwriting Guidelines.  
 
GAPS IN EMPLOYMENT 
Borrower must explain, in writing, any job gaps that span one (1) month or more.   
For borrower re-entering the work force after an extended absence, borrower must be employed at current 
job for a minimum of 6 months.  A previous 2 year work history prior to the gap must be documented. 
 
FULL INCOME DOCUMENTATION 
Full Documentation requires 24 months of verified income and employment history that can reasonably be 
expected to continue, and verification of assets for funds to close (if applicable) and required reserves. 
Regardless of income source and in addition to other verification required or provided, each Borrower must 
sign an IRS Form 4506-C, which must be executed by the originator. Process the executed IRS Form 
4506-C to obtain full tax return transcripts for the two (2) most recent years. Refer to the Non-Agency 
guides for all other income documentation requirements not addressed below. 
 
COMMISSION INCOME 
Commission income must be averaged over the previous two (2) years. To qualify commission income, 
the Borrower must provide: 
•  Copies of signed tax returns for the last two (2) years and most recent pay stub. 
 
Borrowers whose commission income was received for more than one (1) year, but less than two (2) 
years may be considered favorably if the underwriter can: 
•  Document the likelihood that the income will continue and soundly rationalize accepting the 
commission income. 
Notes:  
•  Unreimbursed business expenses must be subtracted from gross income; 
•  A commissioned Borrower is one who receives more than 25 percent of his/her annual income 
from commissions; and 
•  A tax transcript obtained directly from the IRS may be used in lieu of signed tax returns. 
 
Qualifying Commission Income Earned for Less Than One Year. 
•  Commission income earned for less than one (1) year is not considered effective income.  
•  A Borrower's income may also qualify when the portion of earnings not attributed to 
commissions would be sufficient to qualify the Borrower for the mortgage. 
V. Product Guidelines  9 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
 
RESTRICTED STOCK UNITS 
Restricted Stock Units (RSUs) and Stock Options may only be used as qualifying income if the income 
has been consistently received for two (2) years and is identified on the pay stubs, W-2s and tax 
returns as income and the vesting schedule indicates the income will continue for a minimum of three 
(3) years at a similar level as prior three (3) years.  
 
A two (2) year average of prior income received from RSUs or stock options should be used to 
calculate the income, and; The income used for qualifying must be supported by future vesting based 
on the stock price used for qualifying and vesting schedule. using a stock price based on the lower of 
the current stock price or the 52-week average for the most recent twelve (12) months reporting at the 
time of application. 
 
Additional awards must be similar to the qualifying income and awarded on a consistent basis. There 
must be no indication the borrower will not continue to receive future awards consistent with historical 
awards received. 
 
Borrower must be currently employed by the employer that issued the historically received RSUs/stock 
options for the RSUs/stock options to be considered in qualifying income.   
 
Stock must be a publicly traded stock and listed on a U.S. exchange. 
 
Vested restricted stock units and stock options cannot be used for reserves if using for income to 
qualify. 
 
OTHER INCOME 
 
401K/IRA RETIREMENT INCOME 
Distributions from a retirement account, such as a 401(k), IRA, SEP or Keogh retirement account can 
be used as qualifying income provided there is a three (3) year continuance. Document regular and 
continued receipt of the income for, as verified by: 
•  Letters from the organizations providing the income; 
•  Copies of retirement award letters; 
•  Copies of signed federal income tax returns; 
•  IRS W-2 or 1099 forms; or 
•  Proof of current receipt. 
 
When retirement income is paid in the form of a distribution from a 401(k), IRA, or Keogh retirement 
account, determine whether the income is expected to continue for at least three years after the 
date of the mortgage application. In addition: 
•  The borrower must have unrestricted access without penalty to the accounts; and 
•  Retirement income received from an asset-based retirement account (i.e. 401k) requires 2 
months receipt of income. 
•  If the assets are in the form of stocks, bonds, or mutual funds, 70% of the value (remaining after 
any applicable costs for the subject transaction) must be used to determine the number of 
distributions remaining to account for the volatile nature of these assets. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  10 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
MINISTER/CLERGY INCOME 
Ministers and members of the clergy are generally considered self-employed unless exempted by IRS 
from self-employment taxes. If exempt an exception from the IRS must be provided. 
 
Rental or housing allowance received may be considered income for qualifying the Borrower. Written 
documentation such as a VOE provided by the church, must be obtained showing receipt of this 
income. The borrower's paystub must also reflect receipt of the housing allowance. If the Borrower is 
newly employed, obtain a copy of the church budget (in lieu of a check) showing funds have been 
allocated for housing allowance. The housing allowance, although not subject to federal income taxes, 
is subject to self-employment taxes. Gross income on Schedule SE of the Borrower's IRS Form 1040 
must including housing allowance paid. 
 
SELF-EMPLOYED 
A Borrower is considered self-employed where he or she has a 25% or more ownership interest in a 
business. Borrowers who are self-employed but are not using self-employment income to qualify, do not 
have to meet the self-employed income requirements below if the income is positive and not being used. 
Qualifying income must be calculated using Fannie Mae’s cash flow analysis (Form 1084) or a comparable 
income analysis form. 
 
Income from self-employment must be received by the Borrower and documented for two (2) years (or 
more) to be used as qualifying income. The Borrower must own the business for the most recent two (2) 
years. 
 
GENERAL DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SELF-EMPLOYED BORROWER 
•  Signed, dated individual tax returns, with all applicable tax schedules for the most recent two (2) 
years; 
•  For a corporation, “S” corporation, or partnership, signed copies of Federal business income tax 
returns for the last two (2) years, with all applicable tax schedules; and 
•  Year-to-date profit and loss (P&L) statement and balance sheet (including sole-proprietorships) 
 
ESTABLISHING EARNINGS TREND FOR A SELF-EMPLOYED BORROWER 
When qualifying income, the creditor must establish the Borrower's earnings trend from the previous (2) 
two years using the Borrower's tax returns. If a Borrower: 
•  Provides quarterly tax returns, the income analysis may include income through the period 
covered by the tax filing; or 
•  Is not subject to quarterly tax returns, or does not file them, then the income shown on the P&L 
statement may be included in the analysis, provided the income stream based on the P&L is 
consistent with the previous years' earnings; 
•  If the P&L statements submitted for the current year show an income stream considerably 
greater than what is supported by the previous year's tax returns, the creditor must base the 
income analysis solely on the income verified through the tax returns; 
•  If the Borrower's earnings trend for the previous two (2) years is downward and the most recent 
tax return or P&L is less than the prior year's tax return, the Borrower's most recent year's tax 
return or P&L must be used to calculate his/her income. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  11 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
ANALYZING THE FINANCIAL STRENGTH OF THE BUSINESS 
The creditor must consider the business's financial strength by examining annual earnings. Annual 
earnings that are stable or increasing are acceptable, while businesses that show a significant decline 
in income over the analysis period are not acceptable 
 
ALTERNATIVE INCOME DOCUMENTATION - 1 YEAR DOCUMENTATION PROGRAM 
Loans that are part of the 1 Year Documentation require only 1 year of income docs versus the Full 
Documentation Program which requires 2 years. Originators should refer to full documentation guidelines 
for specifics on income requirements (i.e. rental income requires 2 years) except as stated below. 
 
WAGE EARNERS: 
•  One year W2 plus most recent pay stub including year-to-date earnings (YTD must cover 
minimum of 30 days), and a Written Verification of Employment (if needed for the analysis of 
overtime, bonus or commission); 
•  IRS 1040s are not required unless also using other sources of income to qualify i.e. self-
employment, interest/dividends, rental income, fixed income (retirement/social security/ child 
support/alimony; 
•  4506-C W2 transcripts (If 1040 transcripts are provided, W2 transcripts are not required). In the 
case where taxes have been files and the wage transcripts are not available from the IRS, the 
IRA response to the request must reflect, “No Record Found” and be present in the loan file. 
Evidence of any IRS filing extensions must be present in the file. 
 
SELF-EMPLOYED BORROWERS: 
•  Borrowers must be at least 25% self-employed to qualify; 
•  One-year personal and business tax returns (along with all schedules and K-1’s) plus a 
borrower prepared P&L covering time period since last tax filing; 
•  All Borrowers must also provide evidence that business has been in existence for at 2 least 
years via CPA/Tax preparer letter, confirmation from regulatory or state agency, or applicable 
licensing bureau; 
•  Self-employed borrower income in a licensed profession (i.e. Medical, Legal, Accounting) will be 
considered from a business that’s been in existence for less than 2 years, but greater than 1 
year if the borrower has at least 2 years of documented previous experience in the same 
profession, or evidence of formal education in a related field; and 
•  IRS FORM 1040 personal and business 4506-C tax transcripts required for the tax return year 
used for qualifying 
 
ASSET DEPLETION 
This can be combined with other sources of income (i.e. rent, pension, social security etc.) and W2 income 
but cannot be used in conjunction with other asset-related income derived from the same source such as 
Interest/Dividend income, Capital Gains, etc. 
 
Qualifying Income: Qualified Assets divided by 120 (10 year utilization draw schedule) 
 
Qualified Assets: Net Assets (excluding any funds being used for down payment, cash to close and/or 
reserves) multiplied by the following percentages: 
•  100% of the value of checking/savings/money market; 
•  85% of the remaining value of stock/bonds/mutual funds/CDs; and 
V. Product Guidelines  12 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
•  80% for all retirement assets regardless of age. Must meet FNMA criteria for unrestricted access. 
 
RENTAL INCOME 
Rental income from the subject property, as well as from a non-subject property, can be used as qualifying 
income. The Borrower must provide individual Federal income tax returns for the prior two (2) years, 
including Schedule E, to verify a 2-year history of property management. All properties are not required to 
be in service for 2 years to use rental income. Short term rental income can only be used with a 2-year 
history of receipt for that property on the tax returns, leases are not acceptable to document income. 
 
The underwriting analysis may not consider rental income from any property being vacated by the 
Borrower, except under the circumstances described below. 
 
Rental income shall be analyzed in the following manner: 
If rental properties are acquired since the last income tax filing and not shown on Schedule E, using a 
current signed lease or rental agreement, the rental income is calculated by reducing gross rental amount 
by 25% for vacancies and maintenance and subtracting PITIA. 
 
When the Borrower is purchasing a new property as an Owner Occupied residence, but will still retain 
ownership of their existing residence which is being converted to an investment property, the following 
requirements apply: 
•  Up to 75% of the rental income can be used to offset the mortgage payment (PITIA) of the property 
being retained and rented, if there is: 
•  A fully executed lease agreement AND either: 
  A copy of the tenant’s check for security deposit as well as proof of deposit into the 
o
Borrower’s account; or 
  The first month of rental payment as well as proof of deposit into the Borrower’s account is 
o
required 
Note:  The requirement for a two year history of property management to use rental income applies to 
departure properties. 
 
LIABILITIES 
All liability guidelines not addressed in this section must meet the parameters documented in our Non-Agency 
Underwriting Guidelines 
 
BRIDGE LOANS 
Bridge loans - a payment is not required to be included in the DTI when the term of the loan balloons in 6 
months or less. 
 
STUDENT LOANS 
If a monthly student loan payment is provided on the credit report, the lender may use that amount for 
qualifying purposes. If the credit report does not reflect the correct monthly payment, the lender may use 
the monthly payment that is on the student loan documentation (the most recent student loan statement) to 
qualify the borrower.  
 
If the credit report does not provide a monthly payment for the student loan, or if the credit report shows $0 
as the monthly payment, the lender must determine the qualifying monthly payment using one of the 
options below: 
V. Product Guidelines  13 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
•  If the borrower is on an income-driven payment plan, the lender may obtain student loan 
documentation to verify the actual monthly payment. The use of estimated income-based payments 
is not allowed. If the payment is $0 the borrower must qualify using the guides listed below for 
deferred loan/loans in forbearance/income-driven payment of $0. 
•  For deferred loans, loans in forbearance, or income-driven payment of $0 the lender must calculate  
  a payment equal to 2% of the outstanding student loan balance, or  
o
  a fully amortizing payment using the documented loan repayment terms 
o
 
Student loans listed as delinquent must be brought current. If a student loan is charged off, the total will be 
included in the cumulative charge off balance in the last 24 months. If a student loan is placed for 
collection, get a copy of the repayment agreement, a copy of a canceled check and include the payment in 
the DTI. 
 
TRANSACTION TYPES 
 
PURCHASE TRANSACTIONS 
•  The seller must be on title for a minimum of 181 days (from the date seller takes title to date sales 
contract executed); and 
•  12 month chain of title to ensure not a flip transaction.  Property flipping schemes and other similar 
type transactions are not permitted. 
 
RATE/TERM REFINANCE 
•  Cash to borrower may not exceed $5,000. 
•  Borrower must meet Continuity of Obligation guides. 
•  12 month chain of title is required 
•  Properties listed for sale in the last six (6) months are eligible for a rate/term refinance only if the 
property is removed from the market prior to the application date and a motivation letter is provided.  
  Not allowed on investment properties. 
o
 
CASH OUT REFINANCE 
•  A minimum of six (6) months must have elapsed since the most recent mortgage transaction on the 
subject property (either the original purchase transaction or subsequent refinance). This timeframe 
is measured from the note date of the previous transaction to the note date of the current 
transaction. 
•  12 month chain of title is required. 
•  Properties listed for sale in the last six (6) months are not eligible for a cash out refinance 
transaction. This time frame is measured from the date the property was no longer listed or offered 
for sale to the application date of the current transaction. 
 
DELAYED FINANCING 
Borrowers who purchased the subject property within the past six months (measured from the date on 
which the property was purchased to the disbursement date of the new mortgage loan) are eligible for a 
cash-out refinance if all of the following requirements are met: 
•  The original purchase transaction was an arms-length transaction. 
•  The borrower(s) may have initially purchased the property as one of the following: 
V. Product Guidelines  14 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
  A natural person; an eligible inter vivos revocable trust, when the borrower is both the individual 
o
establishing the trust and the beneficiary of the trust; or 
  An eligible land trust when the borrower is the beneficiary of the land trust; or an LLC or 
o
partnership in which the borrower(s) have an individual or joint ownership of 100%. 
 
The new loan amount can be no more than the actual documented amount of the borrower's initial 
investment in purchasing the property plus the financing of closing costs, prepaid fees, and points on the 
new mortgage loan (subject to the maximum LTV, CLTV, and HCLTV ratios for the cash-out transaction 
based on the current appraised value). 
 
All other cash-out refinance eligibility requirements are met. Cash-out pricing is applicable.  Refer to the 
Non-Agency guides for all documentation requirements. 
 
CONTINUITY OF OBLIGATION 
For a refinance transaction (either rate and term/limited cash-out or cash-out), there must be a continuity of 
obligation if there is currently an outstanding lien that will be satisfied through the refinance transaction. 
 
An acceptable Continuity of Obligation exists when any of the following exist: 
•  There is at least one (1) Borrower obligated on the new loan who was also a Borrower obligated on 
the existing loan that is being refinanced; 
•  The Borrower has been on title and residing in the property for at least six (6) months and has 
either paid the mortgage for the last six (6) months or can demonstrate a relationship (parent, 
spouse, domestic partner, sibling, etc.) with the current obligor; 
•  The Borrower has recently inherited or was legally awarded the property (divorce, separation); or 
•  The existing loan being refinanced and the title have been held in the name of a natural person or a 
limited liability company as long as the Borrower was a member of the limited liability company prior 
to transfer. The loan must have been transferred out of Limited Liability Company prior to 
application. Transfer of ownership from a corporation to individual does not meet Continuity of 
Obligation. 
 
NON-ARM’S LENGTH TRANSACTION  
Non-arm’s length transactions involve a personal relationship or business relationship (outside of the 
subject transaction) between the Borrower and any interested party to the transaction. These transactions 
must be fully disclosed as such and the appraiser must be informed of the non-arm’s length transaction 
and address whether or not the market value has been affected. 
 
A "family member" is defined as the Borrower's spouse, child, dependent, domestic partner, fiancé, 
fiancée, or any other individual related to the borrower by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship. 
 
Non-arm’s length transactions are considered only under the following conditions: 
•  Relationships are clearly disclosed with initial submission; 
•  Primary residence only; 
•  Additional risk factors are not present (i.e., distress sale, selling assets for down 
•  payment, etc.); 
•  Loans made to principals or employees of the lender or service provider cannot provide services on 
their own transactions (closing agent, title agent, appraiser, etc.); and 
V. Product Guidelines  15 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
•  In purchase transactions where the lender is a corporation, partnership or any other business entity, 
the seller must ensure that the Borrower is not one of the owners of the business entity selling the 
subject property. 
Family transactions occur when a family member deeds the title to their home to another family member. 
The following apply to family transactions: 
•  Relationships are clearly disclosed with initial submission; 
•  Primary residence only; 
•  Purchase contract must be provided; 
•  A Gift of Equity letter is required to explain the relationship and reason for the gift; 
•  Appraiser must note this is a non-arm’s length transaction; 
•  Foreclosure bailouts are not allowed. Payoff statement and Verification of Mortgage (VOM) on 
subject required as verification; 
•  The HUD-1 must reflect all liens on title are paid and not all loan proceeds going to the family 
member; and 
•  Current appraised value is used for LTV purposes. 
 
SUBORDINATE FINANCING 
Subordinate financing must be provided by a financial institution.  Employer seconds are not allowed.   
Refer to the Non-Agency Underwriting Guidelines for all requirements.   
 
TEXAS REFINANCE LOANS 
All refinance loans in Texas will be evaluated against the criteria outlined in our Non-Agency Underwriting 
Guidelines, Texas Home Equity/50(a)(6) Right of Rescission section to determine whether or not they must be 
originated under the requirements of Section 50(a)(6) of the Texas Constitution. Loans that fall under Section 
50(a)(6) are not eligible. 
 
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
Available with the following geographic restrictions: 
State  Restriction 
Puerto Rico   Not Eligible 
Virgin Islands  Not Eligible 
 
V. Product Guidelines  16 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
ADJUSTABLE RATE DETAILS 
7/6: Initial: 5% up/down; Subsequent: 1% up/down; Lifetime: 5% up 
Interest Rate 
Adjustment Caps  10/6: Initial 5% up/down, Subsequent: 1% up/down; Lifetime: 5% up 
Margin  See Price Indication Sheet  
Index  30 Day SOFR (Secured Overnight Financing Rate) 
Interest Rate Floor  The interest rate floor is equal to the Margin 
7/6 ARM: The first change date is the 84th payment due date. There is a new change date 
every 6 months thereafter. 
Change Dates 
10/6 ARM:  The first change date is the 120th payment due date. There is a new change date 
every 6 months thereafter. 
Conversion Option  None 
Assumption  Not allowed 
Negative 
None 
Amortization 
 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Closing docs may be ordered through Flagstar’s Web-Based Closing Docs (WBCD) service available on 
Loantrac. 
 
FIXED RATE LOANS – FULLY AMORTIZING 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Fixed Rate Note, 3200-series 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
 
FIXED RATE LOANS – INTEREST ONLY 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Interest-Only Period Fixed Rate Note, 3200-series IO or equivalent 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
 
ADJUSTABLE RATE LOANS – 7/6 & 10/6 SOFR FULLY AMORTIZING 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Fannie Mae/ Freddie Mac multi-state Adjustable Rate Note, Form #3442 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Adjustable Rate Rider, Form #3142 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
 
ADJUSTABLE RATE LOANS – 7/6 SOFR INTEREST ONLY 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Multistate Interest-Only Period Fixed/Adjustable Rate Note, Form #3442 IO or equivalent 
•  Multistate Interest-Only Fixed/Adjustable Rate Rider, Form #3142 IO or equivalent 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
 
ADJUSTABLE RATE LOANS – 10/6 SOFR INTEREST ONLY 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Multistate Interest-Only Period Fixed/Adjustable Rate Note, Form #3442 IO or equivalent 
V. Product Guidelines  17 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE

 
 
  Advantage 
•  Multistate Interest-Only Fixed/Adjustable Rate Rider, Form #3142 IO or equivalent 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
 
IF APPLICABLE 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Condo Rider, Form #3140 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Multi-state PUD Rider, Form #3150 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state 1-4 Family Rider, Form #3170  
•  Fannie Mae-Freddie Mac multi-state Second Home Rider, Form #3890 
 
 
 
V. Product Guidelines  18 of 18  Document #5427 
Return to Top      11/04/2022 
 

NEW PAGE