Freddie Mac Refi Possible 
 
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – RATE/TERM REFINANCE   
Maximum  Minimum  Underwriting Engine & 
Property Type 1  Maximum CLTV/HCLTV 
LTV  Credit Score  Required Response 
1-unit 
Refer to Subordinate 
Condo  97%  LPA – Accept/Eligible 
Financing section below 
PUD 
NA 
Manufactured Home  Refer to Subordinate 
95%  LPA – Accept/Eligible 
(double-wide)   Financing section below 
1.  Texas properties – any loan that must be classified as Section 50(a)(6) is not eligible for Refi Possible. 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
Fixed rate, fully amortizing, conventional conforming first lien mortgage loan program used to refinance one-
unit primary residences for borrowers whose income is at or below 100% of the area median income (AMI). 
  Note: For loans prior to 1/31/2022, the income must be at or below 80% of the area median 
o
income (AMI).  LPA will be updated January 31, 2022 and the income limits will increase to 
100% of the AMI at that time. 
 
Additional requirements of the existing loan being refinanced include: 
•  Must be a first lien, conventional mortgage loan currently owned by Freddie Mac, in whole or in part, or 
securitized by Freddie Mac. 
•  Must be seasoned at least 12 months (from the original note date to new loan note date).  
  Note: For loans prior to 1/31/2022, the existing mortgage may not be more than 120 months 
o
old (from the original note date to the new loan date).  LPA will be updated January 31, 2022 
and the 120 months seasoning requirement will be removed. 
•  Must not be: 
  An existing high LTV refinance loan 
o
  A Freddie Mac Relief Refinance loan 
o
  A Freddie Mac Enhanced Relief Refinance loan 
o
  A Refi Possible loan 
o
  A loan subject to an outstanding repurchase request 
o
  A loan subject to recourse, indemnification, or other credit enhancement other than 
o
mortgage insurance (unless the new loan is also subject to credit enhancement or it is no 
longer required) 
 
A look up tool is available at loanlookup.freddiemac.com to determine whether the borrower’s existing loan is 
owned by Freddie Mac. Refer to Freddie Mac Bulletin 2021-17 for further program details. 
 
BORROWER BENEFIT 
The refinanced loan must result in both of the following: 
•  A first lien mortgage interest rate reduction of at least 50 basis points, and 
•  A reduction in the first lien mortgage monthly payment that includes principal, interest, and the 
mortgage insurance payment (if applicable). 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 8  Document #5368 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac Refi Possible 
 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
Loantrac Product Name  Term 
Freddie Mac Refi Possible 30-Year Fixed  30 years 
Freddie Mac Refi Possible 25-Year Fixed   25 years 
Freddie Mac Refi Possible 20-Year Fixed   20 years 
Freddie Mac Refi Possible 15-Year Fixed  15 years 
Freddie Mac Refi Possible 10-Year Fixed  10 years 
 
LOAN REGISTRATION 
When registering a loan with > 95% LTV, the user will be directed to the Additional Loan Purpose Info section of 
the online 1003 in Loantrac, where the current First Mortgage Holder must be selected in the drop-down box. 
 
LOAN AMOUNTS 
MAXIMUM  
Maximum standard conforming loan limits for 1-unit property (high-cost area limits except for standard AK, 
HI, and USVI limits, are not eligible under this program). 
 
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
Borrowers whose income is at or below 100% of the area median income (AMI) 
•  Note: For loans prior to 1/31/2022, the income must be at or below 80% of the area median income 
(AMI).  LPA will be updated January 31, 2022 and the income limits will increase to 100% of the AMI at 
that time. 
 
Borrowers obligated on the note for the Refi Possible loan must be the same as the borrowers obligated on the 
note for the loan being refinanced, except that a borrower obligated on the note for the loan being refinanced 
may be omitted from the note for the Refi Possible loan provided that: 
•  The loan file contains evidence that the remaining borrower has been making the mortgage payments, 
including the payments for any secondary financing, for the most recent 12-month period from their own 
funds; or 
•  In the case of death, evidence of deceased borrower’s death must be documented in loan file. 
 
In all cases, at least one borrower from the mortgage being refinanced must be retained. New borrowers 
cannot be added. 
 
Non-occupant borrowers are permitted if they were also a borrower on the existing loan, and: 
•  A maximum LTV, CLTV, and HCLTV ratio of 95% applies (CLTV ratio may be up to 105% when an 
Affordable/Community Seconds is being resubordinated). 
 
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  1-unit properties 
•  Condominiums 
•  Planned unit developments (PUDs) 
•  Modular homes 
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 8  Document #5368 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac Refi Possible 
•  Manufactured homes, double-wide only 
 
NOTE FOR CONDOS 
Lenders are not required to evaluate if the project meets the project eligibility requirements, provided that: 
•  The lender must confirm the project is not a condominium hotel, or a houseboat, timeshare or 
segmented ownership project; and 
•  The project has insurance that meets the applicable property and flood insurance requirements. Master 
hazard insurance and HO-6 (if required) will be reviewed by Project Review team. 
 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  Condominiums part of a condominium hotel, or a houseboat, timeshare or segmented ownership project 
•  Cooperative properties (Flagstar overlay) 
 
MINIMUM CREDIT SCORES 
Follow LPA response to determine loan eligibility. 
 
FEES / CLOSING COSTS 
There are no limitations on fees or closing costs outside of Flagstar and regulatory standards.  
A $500 credit must be applied to all loans that obtain an appraisal. This credit is not required to be disclosed on 
the Loan Estimate, but it must be entered as a negative number in the Payoffs and Payments section of the 
Closing Disclosure and labeled as “RefiNow/Refi Possible Appraisal Credit.” Loans that are approved by the 
underwriter with an Automated Collateral Evaluation (ACE) (a.k.a., Property Inspection Alternative (PIA)) on the 
feedback report of the last LPA submission will not receive the credit because no appraisal fee will be charged. 
 
QUALIFYING RATE 
Note rate 
 
QUALIFYING RATIOS 
Debt-to-income (DTI) ratio is limited to a maximum of 65%. Mortgage insurers may have additional restrictions. 
 
RESERVES 
Determined by LPA 
 
SUBORDINATE FINANCING 
•  New subordinate financing is only permitted if it replaces existing subordinate financing. 
•  Existing subordinate financing: 
  May not be paid off with the proceeds of the new loan, and 
o
  Can remain in place if it is resubordinated to the new loan: 
o
  Standard subordinate financing up to 97% CLTV (95% CLTV for manufactured homes) 
  Community Seconds subordinate financing up to 105% CTLV (95% for manuf. homes). 
  May be simultaneously refinanced with the existing first lien mortgage, provided that: 
o
  The unpaid principal balance (UPB) of the new subordinate lien is not more than the 
UPB of the subordinate lien being refinanced at the time of payoff, and 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 8  Document #5368 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac Refi Possible 
  There is no increase in the monthly principal and interest payment on the subordinate lien. 
 
Refer to the Subordinate Financing section of the Conventional Underwriting Guidelines for details. 
 
TEMPORARY BUYDOWNS 
Not eligible 
 
UNDERWRITING 
•  Refer to Freddie Mac Bulletin 2021-17, Introducing Freddie Mac Refi Possible. 
•  All loans must be submitted to Loan Product Advisor (LPA) and receive an Accept response. (Note: 
LPA will be updated January 31, 2022 for increased AMI limits to 100%) 
•  Manual underwriting is not allowed (Flagstar overlay). 
•  Loan Product Advisor (LPA) will return a feedback message identifying all loan casefiles that appear to 
be eligible for Refi Possible regardless of the product. If a Refi Possible loan is desired, loans will need 
to be changed to a Refi Possible product and resubmitted to LPA to ensure the loan is fully assessed 
by LPA as a Refi Possible loan. 
 
BORROWER INCOME LIMIT 
•  Borrower’s qualifying income converted to an annual basis must not exceed 100% of the area median 
income (AMI) for the location of the subject property. 
  Note: For loans prior to 1/31/2022, the income must be at or below 80% of the area median 
o
income (AMI).  LPA will be updated January 31, 2022 and the income limits will increase to 
100% of the AMI at that time. 
•  For purposes of determining eligibility, the lender must include the income from all borrowers who will 
sign the note to the extent that the income is considered in evaluating creditworthiness for the loan; for 
example: if there are two borrowers on a loan application, the lender will use the combined total 
qualifying income amount to determine whether the AMI limit has been met. 
•  Loan Product Advisor will determine the income eligibility of the loan. 
 
DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS 
The temporary credit and underwriting requirements and guidance related to COVID-19 also apply to Refi 
Possible mortgages (e.g., P&L and bank statement for self-employed borrowers). Refer to Temporary 
COVID Guidelines for complete details. 
 
Income Type  Minimum Documentation Requirements 
•  Year-to-date (YTD) paystub documenting the YTD earnings 
Base non-fluctuating employment (primary only) 
•  10-day pre-closing verification of employment 
•  YTD paystub documenting the YTD earnings 
Fluctuating hourly employment (primary only) 
•  W-2 for the most recent calendar year 
Tip, bonus, overtime and commission income 
•  10-day pre-closing verification of employment 
Military income (basic pay, entitlements, Reserve 
Military Leave and Earnings Statement 
and National Guard income) 
•  Complete federal individual and business income tax returns 
Self-employment 
for the most recent one-year period, and 
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 8  Document #5368 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac Refi Possible 
•  Verification of the current existence of the business through 
a third-party source obtained either no more than 120 
calendar days prior to Note Date or after the Note Date but 
prior to the Delivery Date 
•  Documentation to evidence receipt of the alimony, child 
support and/or separate maintenance payment amount for 
the most recent one months, and 
Alimony, child support or separate maintenance  •  Copy of the signed court order, legally binding separation 
agreement and/or final divorce decree verifying the payor's 
obligation for the previous one months, including the amount 
and the duration of the obligation 
Standard guideline requirements; refer to the Conventional 
All Other Eligible Income Types 
Underwriting Guidelines and Temporary COVID Guidelines 
 
The following additional documentation requirements apply: 
•  Verbal verification of employment (employed or self-employment) is required as noted in the 
Conventional Underwriting Guidelines and Temporary COVID Guidelines. 
•  Verification of funds to close (only if more than $500) are required. Acceptable asset documentation 
includes one-month account statement or direct account verification. 
•  Verification and consideration of recurring alimony and child support payments as a liability, if 
applicable, are required. Acceptable documentation includes a copy of the divorce decree, separation 
agreement, court order, or equivalent documentation confirming the amount of the obligation. 
 
PAYMENT HISTORY REQUIREMENTS 
Financed properties, including the subject property, must adhere to the mortgage history requirements per 
the Temporary COVID Guidelines, including validation all mortgages are current up to the Note date.  
 
The credit report can be relied on for determination of the payment history up to the date last reported on 
credit. Additional due diligence is required to review the payment history between the date last reported 
and the Note date. 
 
Missed payments resulting from a COVID-related forbearance must meet the eligibility requirements (e.g. 
reinstatement or approved servicer resolution) prior to consummation. 
 
For the loan being refinanced, the loan must not have been: 
•  30 days delinquent in the most recent six months. 
•  30 days delinquent more than once in the most recent 12 months. 
•  60 or more days delinquent in the most recent 12 months. 
 
See the Eligible Borrowers section for additional requirements when one or more borrowers on the existing 
loan are being removed. 
 
SPECIAL FEATURE CODE 
All Refi Possible loans require Special Feature Code (Freddie Mac uses the term Investor Feature 
Identifier) J05. 
 
SIGNIFICANT DEROGATORY CREDIT 
For Freddie Mac loans with an Accept response from LPA, the significance of the derogatory event 
(bankruptcy, foreclosure, deed-in-lieu, or short sale) has been considered in the risk assessment and the 
V. Product Guidelines  5 of 8  Document #5368 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac Refi Possible 
borrower’s credit reputation has been deemed acceptable. No further documentation or recovery time 
period must be met. 
 
UNDERWRITER REFI POSSIBLE WORKSHEET 
•  The underwriter must use the RefiNow/Refi Possible worksheet, Doc. #3296, to: 
  Validate the maximum interest rate, 
o
  Validate the maximum principal, interest and mortgage insurance (if applicable) payment, AND 
o
  Validate that the borrower does not receive in excess of $250 in cash back at closing. 
o
 
As stated on the worksheet, the following items MUST be submitted for all Refi Possible applications to aid 
in verifying the calculations: 
•  Loan File must contain documentation to support current interest rate, principal and interest 
payment, and MI payment (e.g. Note, Mortgage Statement, etc.). 
•  Loan commitment expiration date cannot exceed the end of the month proceeding the next 
payment due date. 
 
USE OF PROCEEDS 
The proceeds of the Refi Possible loan must be used only to: 
•  Pay off the first mortgage 
•  Disburse cash to the borrower not to exceed $250 
 
In the event there are remaining proceeds from the Refi Possible loan after the proceeds are applied as 
described above, the excess proceeds must be applied as a principal curtailment to the Refi Possible loan 
and must be clearly reflected on the Closing Disclosure. 
Subordinate liens, even if used for the purchase of the property and otherwise eligible for pay off with a 
rate/term refinance, may not be paid off with proceeds of a Refi Possible loan. 
TEXAS REFINANCE LOANS 
All refinance loans in Texas will be evaluated against the criteria outlined in our Conventional Underwriting 
Guidelines, Texas Refinances section to determine if the loan must be originated under the requirements of 
Section 50(a)6 of the Texas Constitution. Loans that must be treated as Section 50(a)(6) are not eligible under 
this program. 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE 
Mortgage insurance providers may have additional restrictions not listed within this document; check the 
provider’s website for completed details. Prior to running an MI quote through the Mortgage Insurance screen 
in Loantrac, users will be asked to complete a new field to identify the existing MI provider on the loan. 
 
MI Company  How They are Handling Refi Possible Applications 
Arch 
Will insure only Refi Possible loans if they currently insure the 
MGIC 
borrower’s existing loan 
Radian 
Enact (f.k.a. Genworth)  Will insure any loan that meets Refi Possible guidelines, 
National  regardless of the current MI provider 
 
V. Product Guidelines  6 of 8  Document #5368 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac Refi Possible 
STANDARD MORTGAGE INSURANCE GUIDELINES 
All loans above 80% LTV require mortgage insurance coverage according to the following guidelines.  
Manufactured Home 
LTV  > 20-Year Term  <= 20-Year Term 
All Loan Terms 
95.01 - 97%  35%  35%  NA 
90.01 - 95%  30%  25%  30% 
85.01 - 90%  25%  12%  25% 
80.01 - 85%  12%  6%  12% 
 
Single financed and lender paid MI options are not eligible under this program (Flagstar overlay). 
 
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
States not listed are available without restrictions. 
State  Restriction 
Puerto Rico  Not eligible 
•  Loans that must be classified as Section 
Texas 
50(a)(6) loans are not eligible 
 
PREPAYMENT PENALTY 
None 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Closing docs may be ordered through Flagstar’s Web Based Closing Docs (WBCD) service available in Loantrac. 
 
A $500 credit must be applied to all loans that obtain an appraisal. The credit must be entered as a negative 
number in the Payoffs and Payments section of the Closing Disclosure and labeled as “RefiNow/Refi Possible 
Appraisal Credit.” Loans that are approved by the underwriter with a Property Inspection Alternative (PIA) on the 
findings of the last LPA submission will not receive the credit because there will be no appraisal fee charged. 
 
Borrowers may not receive cash out at closing in excess of $250. Excess proceeds must be applied as a 
curtailment on the new loan and must be clearly reflected on the Closing Disclosure. 
 
ALL LOANS: 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series. 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Fixed Rate Note, 3200-series. 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements. 
IF APPLICABLE: 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Condo Rider, Form #3140. 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state PUD Rider, Form #3150. 
 
Refer to Flagstar’s All Memos Search page for memos relating to recent guidelines changes. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  7 of 8  Document #5368 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac Refi Possible 
LOAN DELIVERY INFORMATION 
When delivering loans to Freddie Mac, sellers must include the following ULDD Data Points: 
•  Related Loan Investor Type (Sort ID 222): FRE 
•  Related Investor Loan Identifier (Sort ID 221): <Associated FRE Loan #>, the 9-digit Freddie Mac loan 
number assigned to the original Mortgage 
•  Investor Feature Identifier (Sort ID 368): J05, indicating Refi Possible Mortgage 
 
 
V. Product Guidelines  8 of 8  Document #5368 
Return to Top    04/22/2022 

NEW PAGE