Guidelines for Down Payment Assistance Programs
 
DOWN PAYMENT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM GENERAL INFORMATION 
Down payment assistance (DPA) can take a variety of forms: gift funds, grant money, secured loans 
(hereinafter referred to as Community Seconds) and unsecured loans.  Down payment assistance programs 
are used to provide funds for down payment, closing costs and/or prepaids.  The information below will: 
•  Define the difference between a Community Second program and a Gift/Grant program, 
•  Describe how to register loans with a Community Second or Gift/Grant in Flagstar’s Loantrac System, 
•  Describe how the underwriter needs to address the different types of programs when running through 
the automated underwriting system(s), and 
•  Describe how the underwriter is to condition for the particular programs at loan closing.  
 
Many in the industry refer to all down payment assistance programs as grants when in fact the vast majority of 
DPA programs are structured as secured loans. Unsecured loans are not addressed within these guidelines 
and should be reviewed by the underwriter according to the applicable investor criteria. 
Flagstar publishes separate lists of eligible Community Second programs and Gift/Grant programs.  Refer to 
Community Seconds Programs, Doc. #5932 and Gift/Grant Programs, Doc. #5935. 
How to determine if a program is a Community Second or a Gift/Grant:  
•  Is a lien filed in the property records? 
•  Do the guidelines mention that the transaction is a “loan” or that a “retention agreement” is filed? 
 
If any type of lien is filed the DPA program is considered a Community Second loan and not a Gift/Grant. The 
loan amount must be considered in the CLTV, and if any payments are required in the first five years (three 
years for FHA) the payment must be included in the borrower’s debt-to-income (DTI) ratio. 
ELIGIBLE PROGRAM PROVIDERS 
•  Government entities (states, counties, cities, etc.), government agencies, or instrumentalities of 
government  
•  Verifiable non-profit agencies (a 501(c)3 letter is required for verification) 
•  Employers (through an established employer-assisted housing program) 
 
INELIGIBLE PROGRAM PROVIDERS 
•  Seller funded 
•  Broker funded 
•  Realtor funded 
•  Builder funded 
•  For profit entities 
 
The listing of a program on either of the above lists does not override the requirements of the product 
description or underwriting guidelines.   
 
Cash back to the borrower is prohibited on a Community Seconds transaction. 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 7  Document #5936 
Return to Top            01/22/2019 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Guidelines for Down Payment Assistance Programs
 
COMMUNITY SECONDS PROGRAMS 
Community Seconds programs are loans secured by the subject property.  The loan may or may not be 
forgiven at the end of the loan term.  A Note (sometimes referred to as a Loan Agreement or other name) is 
signed at closing, and a Deed of Trust/Mortgage or a Deed Restriction is filed to secure the loan.  Repayment 
terms must always be reviewed by Flagstar for compliance with Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and HUD 
guidelines. The agency providing the assistance must provide an award/approval letter to the underwriter, 
outlining the exact amount of the assistance and the repayment terms.  While the loan may be forgiven after a 
specified retention period, some programs require the loan to be paid off upon sale of the property, and in 
some instances payments are required during the term of the loan. If a payment is required within the first five 
years (three years for FHA) the payment must be considered in the borrower’s DTI. 
 
Flagstar will allow more than one Community Second loan to be used with a Flagstar first mortgage as long as 
the CLTV does not exceed the maximum allowed by the first mortgage loan program. 
 
BELOW MARKET RATE PROGRAMS (BMR) 
Below market rate programs are reviewed in the same manner as a Community Second.  BMR programs 
generally have a non-monetary Note, Mortgage and Restrictive Covenant associated. 
 
GIFT/GRANT PROGRAMS 
Gift or Grant programs require no repayment and no lien is filed in the property records.  These types of funds 
are provided by a government agency, a verified nonprofit agency or the borrower’s employer.  If the 
award/approval letter states a lien will be taken on the property (even if all payments are deferred) the program 
is considered a Community Second. Gift/Grant assistance is entered as an asset on the 1003 in Loantrac. 
 
Another type of grant program is an Individual Development Account (IDA).  In most cases these programs do 
not have any recapture provision.  When they do have a recapture provision, they are considered Community 
Seconds. 
 
COMMUNITY SECONDS REQUIRING LENDER PARTICIPATION 
Many organizations offering down payment assistance require lenders to become approved with them in order 
to participate in the DPA program.  Lender participation can include, but is not limited to: 
•  An agreement must be signed (agreements have requirements that must be able to be met) 
•  Training for the program must take place 
•  The program underwriting guidelines must be followed (even if different than the first mortgage program 
guidelines). 
•  A financial contribution may be required (whether it is an annual fee or a commitment fee) 
 
Flagstar guidelines state, “Any lender participation required by the program would require the 
broker’s/correspondent’s approval for participation.”  In essence this means, the broker or correspondent is 
responsible for the relationship and whatever it entails with the DPA provider. Flagstar will not itself become 
approved with any DPA provider. 
 
Flagstar reviews programs to determine if we can comply with the first mortgage investor guidelines for 
compliance purposes only. 
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 7  Document #5936 
Return to Top            01/22/2019 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Guidelines for Down Payment Assistance Programs
 
FLAGSTAR-ELIGIBLE FIRST MORTGAGE PROGRAMS 
Community Second programs are eligible for use with Flagstar Bank first mortgage products as outlined below 
by the investor/guarantor. 
 
FANNIE MAE 
•  Fannie Mae Fixed Rate, Doc. #5301 
•  Agency 3/1, 5/1, 7/1 and 10/1 ARMs, Doc. #5331 (only 5/1 and 7/1 ARMs eligible with Community 
Seconds) 
•  Fannie Mae HomeReady, Doc. #5318 
•  Fannie Mae HomeStyle Renovation, Doc. #5719 
 
All closing documents for the second lien program should be submitted to Flagstar with first mortgage 
closing package. 
 
FREDDIE MAC 
•  Freddie Mac Fixed Rate, Doc. #5302 
•  Freddie Mac A-Minus Program, Doc. #5303 
•  Agency 3/1, 5/1, 7/1 and 10/1 ARMs, Doc. #5331 (only 5/1 and 7/1 ARMs eligible with Affordable 
Seconds) 
•  Freddie Mac HomePossible, Doc. #5335 
•  Freddie Mac Home One, Doc. #5339 
 
All closing documents for the second lien program should be submitted to Flagstar with first mortgage 
closing package. 
 
FHA 
Refer to the appropriate HUD Handbook based on the agency case date as well as the LTV/CLTV and 
Subordinate Financing sections in Flagstar’s FHA Underwriting Guidelines. All programs will be reviewed 
according to the appropriate FHA guidelines. Non-profit entities must be approved by HUD to provide down 
payment assistance. All closing documents for the second lien program should be submitted to Flagstar 
with first mortgage closing package. 
 
VA 
VA provides blanket approval for down payment assistance programs offered by government entities; 
however, programs must still appear on the appropriate Flagstar list (Community Seconds or Gift/Grant) 
and Flagstar reserves the right not to accept any program that does not meet our standards. For DPA 
programs offered by non-profit entities, lenders cannot themselves determine whether a DPA program is 
acceptable. All such programs must be submitted to the VA for review. Flagstar will not submit programs to 
the VA. The non-profit entity must work with the VA directly and provide the VA approval documentation 
with the program review package. All closing documents for the second lien program should be submitted 
to Flagstar with the first mortgage closing package. 
 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT (RD) 
While not true in every case, generally programs deemed acceptable by Flagstar for use with Fannie Mae 
loan programs will be acceptable for use with Rural Development loan programs as well. All closing 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 7  Document #5936 
Return to Top            01/22/2019 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Guidelines for Down Payment Assistance Programs
 
documents for the second lien program should be submitted to Flagstar with first mortgage closing 
package. 
 
REGISTRATION AND UNDERWRITING GUIDELINES 
Eligible programs are entered in Loantrac as Affordable/Community Seconds. 
   
 
The Affordable Community Seconds Repayment Type is then chosen based on whether the payments are 
forgiven or not.   
 
 Payments must be deferred for a minimum of five years (conventional) or three years (FHA) or the payment 
must be included in the DTI. The approval letter from the DPA provider must be provided to the Underwriter 
outlining the exact dollar amount and the repayment terms of the Community Second.  Underwriting must 
include an “at close” condition for the secondary lien.  If more than one Community Second is to be used on an 
individual loan, each subordinate lien must be conditioned separately with the name of the lien holder and the 
dollar amount of the Community Second lien. (Conditions should be the same for a Community Second lien as 
it would be for any subordinate financing). 
 
REFINANCE TRANSACTIONS 
If a DPA program is being re-subordinated we require only the following information be submitted to 
Product.Development@Flagstar.com for review: 
•  The loan number of the refinance loan 
•  A copy of the original DPA note, and 
•  The subordination agreement for the DPA lien 
 
PROGRAM REVIEW 
To have a program reviewed for eligibility, please submit the documentation indicated on the Down Payment 
Assistance Submission Checklist, Doc. #3284 for review to Product Development via Fax: 888-633-4101 or via 
email to Product.Development@Flagstar.com. 
   
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 7  Document #5936 
Return to Top            01/22/2019 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Guidelines for Down Payment Assistance Programs
 
Glossary of Terms 
501(C)3  Letter from IRS showing organization's status as a nonprofit agency 
ADDI  American Dream Down-payment Initiative 
Approved secondary financing loans that can come from any duly authorized authority or 
Affordable Second –  agency of the federal, State, local or municipal government, a nonprofit community or 
Freddie Mac  religious  organization, the borrower's employer, or a regional Federal Home  Loan Bank 
under one of its affordable housing programs 
AHP  Affordable Housing Program 
AHOP  Affordable Housing Opportunity Program or Affordable Homeownership Program 
Household income is a measure of current private income commonly used by the United 
States government and private institutions. To measure the income of a household, the pre-
tax money receipts of all residents over the age of 18 over a single year  are combined. Most 
of these receipts are in the form of wages and salaries, but many other forms of income, 
such as unemployment  insurance, disability, child support, etc., are included as well. The 
AMI  residents of the household do not have to be related to the householder for their earnings to 
be considered part of the household's income. As households tend to share a common 
economic fate, the use of household income remains among the most far and widely 
accepted measures of income. However, the size of a household, which is commonly not 
considered, creates significant distortions which offset gains or decreases in household 
income and makes direct comparisons between quintiles impossible 
Below Market Rate.  Program in which city reaches an agreement with a developer to sell  a 
BMR  certain number of new developed properties to income eligible borrowers for a reduced 
(Below Market) price 
A bond program sells bonds and uses the funds to provide first and sometimes second 
Bond Program  mortgages to eligible borrowers. Lender  participation is required.  These are specific to state, 
county and local government programs 
California Housing & Finance Agency (or Authority) Disburses funds to a number of 
CalHFA  government and nonprofit agencies for DPA. Each program participant develops their own 
guidelines for their  agency; therefore each program must be reviewed individually. 
CASA  Community Activity-Set Aside Program 
Community Assisted Shared Appreciation.  Loan that requires shared appreciation payback 
CASA Home LoanTM 
when home is no longer primary residence 
CDBG  Community Development Block Grant 
Community Development Corporation.  Community Development Corporation (CDC) is a 
CDC  broad term referring  to not-for-profit organizations incorporated to provide programs, offer 
services and engage in other activities that promote and support a  community 
CDD  Community Development Department 
CHDO  Community Housing Development Organizations 
CHIP  Community Housing Improvement Program 
Community Seconds allows a borrower to obtain a second lien mortgage that typically is 
Community Second – 
funded by a federal, state, or local government agency, an employer, or a nonprofit 
Fannie Mae 
organization and  may be forgiven 
DAP  Down-payment Assistance Program 
Based on the program the property may file a deed restriction in lieu of the note/mortgage. 
Deed Restriction  Deed Restrictions in the context of a community second generally restrict use of property 
(must be primary residence) and resale price 
In a Community Second or retention agreement default is meant that the borrower does not 
meet their guidelines by either - not living in the home as their primary residence, as well as 
Default 
failure to pay the first mortgage, taxes etc. This can trigger the default clause in the note and 
required payments to be required 
V. Product Guidelines  5 of 7  Document #5936 
Return to Top            01/22/2019 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Guidelines for Down Payment Assistance Programs
 
Glossary of Terms 
Based on the program, payments are deferred for a certain period of time based on the 
Deferred Payments  program guidelines. Payments can be deferred  for the entire term of the loan as long as the 
borrower does not default on the loan 
DOT  Deed of Trust aka Mortgage 
Down-payment Assistance.  These may be in the form of an Affordable/Community Second 
DPA 
or a Gift/Grant 
EAH  Employer Assisted Housing 
Employer Identification Number, all companies have an EIN, it is  found on their W-9 if they 
EIN 
are a business or government agency, or 501(c)3 letter if they are a nonprofit agency 
Fannie Mae Checklist 
for Community  Checklist of items to determine eligibility for Community Second Programs for FNMA 
Seconds 
FEIN  Federal Employer Identification Number 
FHLB  Federal Home Loan Bank - considered a government agency by  HUD 
FLHOP  Florida Housing Opportunities Program 
First Time Home Buyer.  As per HUD guidelines, has not owned a home in the past 3 years, 
FTHB 
or qualifies as a displaced homemaker 
The length of time a borrower must remain in the property as their primary residence in order 
Forgivability period  for the loan to be forgiven.  No payments (unless otherwise noted) must be made during this 
period 
Difference between what borrower can afford to put down and the amount required by the 
GAP 
lender, or a predetermined LTV by the DPA provider 
Gift  A Gift or Grant program will require no mortgage lien or deferred  payments 
Government Agency  Any State, County, City, municipal, Federal Home Loan Bank, or Indian Tribes 
Grant  A Gift or Grant program will require no mortgage lien or deferred  payments 
HAP  Homeowners Advantage Program or Homeowner Assistance Program 
HIP  Homeownership Incentive Program 
The HOME Investment Partnerships Program (HOME) is a type of United States Federal 
assistance provided by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to 
States in order to provide decent and affordable housing, particularly housing for low- and 
very low-income Americans. It is the largest Federal block grant to States and local 
HOME  governments designed exclusively to create affordable housing for low-income families, 
providing over US $2 billion each year. The program is commonly referred to as the Home 
Investment or Home Partnership Program, and is often operating in conjunction with other 
housing and other urban development programs, such as the CDBG program. Its federal 
identification number, or CFDA number, is 14.239. 
Freddie Mac REO division. There is no loan product (such as FNMA HomePath) for their 
Home Steps 
REO's. Check their website for current seller concessions 
HOP  Homeowners Opportunity Program 
HOPE (for  Homeownership Preservation Subsidy Program.   Not a DPA program, this is a workout 
Homeowners)  program for delinquent mortgagees 
HPS  Homeownership Preservation Subsidy Program 
HUD  Any financing (other than the FHA-insured first mortgage) that creates a lien against the 
description of "soft or  property is considered secondary financing and not a gift, even if it is a '''soft''' or '''silent''' 
silent second"  second (which has no repayment provision) or has other features forgiving the debt 
Nonprofit agencies approved for community seconds by HUD, divided into four regions. For 
HUD Nonprofit Agency 
FHA loans, non-profit agencies that  provide secondary financing must be approved by the 
Roster 
appropriate regional loan center." 
V. Product Guidelines  6 of 7  Document #5936 
Return to Top            01/22/2019 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Guidelines for Down Payment Assistance Programs
 
Glossary of Terms 
An Individual Development Account (IDA) is a matched savings  account that enables low-
income families to save, build assets, and enter the financial mainstream. IDAs supplement 
the savings of 
IDA 
Low income households with matching funds drawn from a variety of private and public 
sources. The borrower's funds are listed as assets, and the matching funds are true gift 
funds. There can be no cash back to borrower when using these funds 
Indian Tribe  Indian tribes are considered an instrumentality of government as a sovereign nation 
In order to be considered an instrumentality of government the nonprofit must be an entity 
Instrumentality of 
"established by a governmental body or  with governmental approval or under special law to 
Government 
serve a particular public purpose or designated by law (statue of court  opinion.) 
Any lender participation required by the program would require the  broker/correspondents 
Lender Participation 
approval for participation 
MALP  Mortgage Assistance Loan Program 
MAP  Mortgage Assistance Program 
Mortgage Credit Certificate - these are not gift/grants/or Community  Seconds.   Refer to the 
MCC 
Conventional Underwriting Guidelines for details 
NHS  Neighborhood Housing Services 
A non-profit organization (abbreviated NPO, also not-for-profit)  is an organization that does 
not distribute its surplus funds to  owners or shareholders, but instead uses them to help 
Non-profit Agency 
pursue its  goals. Examples of NPOs include charities (i.e. charitable  organizations). For 
Flagstar purposes an IRS designated 501(c)3  letter is required 
Neighborhood Stabilization Program. This is part of the stimulus  program that provides funds 
NSP  to government agencies and nonprofits  to help reduce the number of foreclosed properties. 
Funds can only be used for the purpose of buying and/or renovating a foreclosed  property 
PIN  Police In Neighborhood 
Red Text  This simply designates new programs added for tracking purposes 
Filed in lieu of a note and Deed of Trust/Mortgage to assure borrower remains in property as 
principle residence for a specified period of time. It is still considered a lien on the property 
Retention Agreement 
and loans  with a retention agreement filed are still considered a Community Second and not 
a gift/grant 
Not allowed. Seller - or any party who benefits monetarily from the transaction - reimburses 
Seller Funded DPA 
the "gifting" agency the funds 
In lieu of interest paid on the loan when second lien is paid off an  “equity share” is paid to the 
lien holder. An Agency may not charge interest and still get shared appreciation.   This may 
Shared Appreciation/ 
not exceed the percentage of assistance toward the  purchase price originally given. (If 10% 
Shared Equity 
of purchase price was given as DPA then no more than 10% of shared equity, plus the 
original loan amount may be required to be paid when loan is due.) 
SHIP  State Housing Initiatives Program 
FHA refers to silent seconds as seconds with no repayment provision or a second having 
other forgivable features. The term “silent second” is used most frequently to describe self-
Silent Second  serving or perhaps fraudulent schemes where house sellers accept second mortgages as 
part of a sale transaction, without the full knowledge  of the first mortgage lender. The 
“silence” refers to the absence of full disclosure to the first mortgage lender. 
Same as Affordable/Community Second, the term is typically used in the Eastern United 
Soft Second 
States 
WISH  Workforce Initiative Subsidy for Homeownership 
 
 
 
V. Product Guidelines  7 of 7  Document #5936 
Return to Top            01/22/2019 

NEW PAGE