Freddie Mac HomeOne 
Mortgage insurance providers may have additional restrictions not listed within this document.  Please refer to 
each mortgage insurance company’s website for complete eligibility details.  
PRIMARY RESIDENCE – PURCHASE AND RATE/TERM REFINANCE 1 
Minimum  Underwriting Engine & 
Property Type  Maximum LTV  Maximum TLTV/HTLTV 2 
Credit Score  Required Response 
   
1-Unit  
97%  105%/97% 
Warrantable Condo   NA  LPA - Accept 
   
PUD 
   
1.  See Loan Purpose section below 
2.  Maximum TLTV ratios for mortgages with secondary financing that are not Affordable Seconds is 97%.  Maximum TLTV ratio for mortgages with 
Affordable Seconds is 105%.  Maximum HTLTV ratio is 97%.  See Subordinate Financing section below for eligibility requirements for Affordable 
Seconds (aka Community Seconds). 
PROGRAM SUMMARY 
HomeOne Mortgages are fixed rate, single family residence mortgages. 
 
PRODUCTS OFFERED 
Product Name  Term 
Freddie Mac HomeOne 30-Year Fixed  30 years 
Freddie Mac HomeOne 25-Year Fixed  25 years 
Freddie Mac HomeOne 20-Year Fixed  20 years 
Freddie Mac HomeOne 15-Year Fixed  15 years 
 
LOAN AMOUNTS 
MAXIMUM 
Maximum standard conforming loan limits for 1-unit properties (high-cost area limits, except for standard AK, HI, 
and USVI exceptions, are not eligible under this program). 
 
ELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  For purchase transactions, at least one borrower must be a first-time homebuyer who meets all of the 
following requirements: 
  Is purchasing the mortgaged premises 
o
  Will reside in the mortgaged premises as a primary residence 
o
  Had no ownership interest (sole or joint) in a residential property during the three-year period 
o
preceding the date of the purchase of the mortgaged premises 
  A displaced homemaker or a single parent if the individual had no ownership interest in a 
o
residential property during the preceding three year period other than an ownership interest in 
the marital residence with a spouse.  If they solely owned the marital residence, or solely or 
jointly owned a second home or investment property, the individual may not be considered a 
first-time homebuyer 
 
INELIGIBLE BORROWERS 
•  Non-occupant co-borrowers 
 
V. Product Guidelines  1 of 4  Document #5339 
Return to Top    07/28/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac HomeOne 
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  1-unit properties 
•  Freddie Mac-warrantable condominium 
•  Planned Unit Development (PUD) 
•  Modular home 
 
INELIGIBLE PROPERTY TYPES 
•  2 to 4-unit properties 
•  Manufactured home 
•  Cooperative property 
 
MINIMUM CREDIT SCORES 
All cores must meet the credit score validation requirements outlined in the Conventional Underwriting 
Guidelines. 
 
QUALIFYING RATE 
•  Note rate 
 
LOAN PURPOSE 
Refinance Loans must meet the following requirements: 
•  Mortgage being refinanced must be owned in whole or in part or securitized by Freddie Mac 
  the loan look-up tool within can be located at https://ww3.freddiemac.com/loanlookup 
o
•  Mortgages with TLTV with secondary financing that is not an Affordable Second, the mortgage being 
refinanced must be owned in whole or in part or securitized by Freddie Mac 
•  Mortgages with secondary financing that is an Affordable Second, the mortgage being refinanced does 
not have to be owned or securitized by Freddie Mac 
•  Existing Affordable Second liens that can be documented to have been used for the original purchase 
of the property may be refinanced into the new loan. 
•  Existing Affordable Second liens may be re-subordinated. 
 
Freddie Mac loan ownership can be determined by using the Freddie Mac Loan Look-up Tool and confirmation 
placed in the loan file. 
 
QUALIFYING RATIOS 
•  Determined by Loan Product Advisor (LPA)  
 
UNDERWRITING 
All loans must meet the parameters as set out in Flagstar Bank’s Residential Underwriting Guidelines. 
•  All loans must submitted to Loan Product Advisor (LPA) and receive an Accept response. 
  Findings must indicate that the loan has been assessed as a HomeOne Mortgage. 
o
•  At least one borrower must complete a homeownership education course if all borrowers are first time 
homebuyers.  See Homeownership Education below. 
V. Product Guidelines  2 of 4  Document #5339 
Return to Top    07/28/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac HomeOne 
•  All scores must meet the credit score validation requirements outlined in the Conventional Underwriting 
Guidelines.  Manual underwriting, thin file or non-traditional credit profiles are not eligible. 
•  First-time homeowners may not own any other residential property. 
•  No minimum contribution from borrower personal funds are required.  Sources of funds follow standard 
guidelines 
 
INTERESTED PARTY CONTRIBUTIONS 
Interested party contributions include funds contributed by the property seller (directly or indirectly), builder, 
real estate agent/broker, or any other party with an interest in the real estate transaction. The mortgage lender 
may also be considered an interested party if it has an ownership relationship with the property seller or one of 
the other interested parties such as the builder or real estate broker/agent.  Such contributions may be used to: 
•  Reduce permanently the interest rate of the mortgage 
•  Towards mortgage financing costs, closing costs, or prepaids/escrows, including up to 12 months of 
homeowners association dues. 
•  Maximum 3% 
 
HOMEOWNERSHIP EDUCATION 
Refer to Conventional Underwriting Guidelines for requirements.   
 
SUBORDINATE FINANCING 
Refer to the Subordinate Financing section of the Conventional Underwriting Guidelines for details. The use of 
financing obtained from the property seller is not allowed. 
 
Eligible Affordable (Community) Seconds subsidized subordinate financing. Community Seconds may be 
eligible from a state, local or municipal authority or agency, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation, a tax-exempt 
religious organization or the borrower’s employer. Flagstar Bank must review all Community Second programs 
for eligibility. An official written description of the program (from the agency providing the funds), the loan 
documents used in connection with the financing (i.e. the Note, Mortgage/Deed of Trust, etc.), and any other 
written descriptive material must be submitted with the loan file. Subordinate financing program review 
generally requires three to five business days for approval. 
 
TEMPORARY BUYDOWNS 
Not eligible 
 
TEXAS REFINANCE LOANS   
All refinance loans in Texas will be evaluated against the criteria outlined in the Texas Home Equity/50(a)(6) 
Right of Rescission section of Conventional Underwriting Guidelines, to determine whether or not they must be 
originated under the requirements of Section 50(a)(6) of the Texas Constitution. Those determined to fall under 
Section 50(a)(6) must refer to the Texas Homestead 50(a)(6) Refinance, Doc #5907 program descriptions for 
eligibility standards. 
 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE   
Mortgage insurance providers may have additional restrictions not listed within this document. Due to rapid 
changes within the industry, please refer to each mortgage insurance company's website for complete details. 
Reduced MI coverage is not eligible. 
 
V. Product Guidelines  3 of 4  Document #5339 
Return to Top    07/28/2022 

NEW PAGE

 
 
 
  Freddie Mac HomeOne 
All loans require mortgage insurance coverage according to the following guidelines: 
 
MORTGAGE INSURANCE GUIDELINES 
Primary Residence – Purchase & Rate/Term Refinance 
LTV  25 & 30-Year  15 & 20-Year 
95.01-97%  35%  35% 
90.01-95%  30%  25% 
85.01-90%  25%  12% 
80.01-85%  12%  6% 
 
NEW YORK PROPERTIES 
See Conventional Underwriting Guidelines. 
 
For Single Financed Mortgage Insurance (SFMI) and Lender Paid Mortgage Insurance (LPMI) eligibility 
see Single Financed Mortgage Insurance (SFMI) & Lender Paid Mortgage Insurance (LPMI) Matrix, Doc. 
#5010. 
 
STATE ELIGIBILITY 
These products are available in the following states/territories with restrictions. The states/territories not listed 
are available without restrictions. 
State/Territory  Restriction 
Puerto Rico  Ineligible 
Refer to Mortgage Insurance section above for mortgage 
New York 
insurance coverage calculation requirements.  
Texas  Refer to Texas Refinances section above.  
 
PREPAYMENT PENALTY 
None 
 
CLOSING DOCUMENTATION 
Closing docs may be ordered through Flagstar’s Web Based Closing Docs (WBCD) service available in 
Loantrac.  
 
ALL LOANS 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Uniform Security Instrument, 3000-series 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Fixed Rate Note, 3200-series 
•  Standard title commitment with all applicable endorsements 
 
IF APPLICABLE 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state Condo Rider, Form# 3140 
•  Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac multi-state PUD Rider, Form# 3150 
 
V. Product Guidelines  4 of 4  Document #5339 
Return to Top    07/28/2022 

NEW PAGE